Title: 752_Lec11
Source file: 752_Lec11.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

And it'll be up until unit five, so pretty much, or maybe we should get done by the material for exam one by next Wednesday to leave a couple of weeks. I'll send you an email about it. And then, you know, an example of an exam I have available on campus. Anybody have any questions or anything to say? I was wondering about the format of the exam, but you're going to post it a little again, I guess that question's answered. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, you know, yeah, I mean, several multiple choice, several true-falls, actually more than the practice exam, a little bit of the sample exam. And then, you know, I'm going to ask questions on the paper, so, you know, and then other stuff. I'm going to be very similar to that, but of course, there won't be any single, even a single question. So, yeah, other questions? Okay, let's move on then to unit five, and that's the first part of dynamic scheduling. So, again, now we are firmly in the CPU. We'll talk about the basics of dynamic scheduling and order-of-order execution. Then we'll talk about the CDC scoreboard technique, which was dynamic scheduling, but it still had write-after-write and write-after-read hazards installed. Okay, so, you know, simple in-order pipeline. In-order pipeline, I have this piece of code, an add, feeding the multiply, and then there's a subtract that is independent, if you will. Okay, and a single, you know, in-order pipeline, this multiply has to wait for the result of F2, so it cannot, it has to stall and decode. And therefore, any instruction behind it, there's a propagated stall, which cannot even enter decoder until the previous instruction has logged. Okay, so the multiply stalls do the read-after-write hazard, and that is, it has to, it's read-after-write hazard. But the subtract stalls, due to this pipeline hazard, a propagated stall, you know, subtract cannot proceed to decode because multiply is there, and this isn't a fundamental reason. So it's completely independent. It could happen in parallel or even before these operations. So what we're going to do with dynamic scheduling is, rather than have instruction just flow one app to the other, what we're going to do is, we're going to take the instructions, figure out what they are, decode them, and dump them into an instruction buffer. Okay, and so they're fetched, decoded, renamed, and basically dumped into an instruction buffer, which is also called the instruction window or instruction scheduler. And then, from this instruction buffer, every cycle you check to see which instructions are ready to execute. When an instruction is ready to execute, proceed and execute that over there. Okay, I won't go into this, we'll get to that later on. Now, one of the tricks that we're going to use in out-of-order execution is register rename. What is the big picture over here? So if I have a lot of instructions to execute, instructions and inputs, let us say I only have registered values. I don't have any, you know, there's no memory in some sense, okay? So I have lots of inputs, and each instruction has an output. So say I have, you know, 20 instructions that I'm in flight at any time, I have to have space to put 20 different values. If I have 200 instructions, I have to have space to put 200 different values that are live and active, okay? What did we do in the IA 64? We had, everything was done statically, so we had 128 static registers to keep the values where the instruction that needed the value would get it from. So what we're going to do in dynamic scheduling is, and by the way, if we didn't have enough registers, that's when we got the write after read and write after write hazards, okay? So what we're going to do is we conceptually, we're going to have physical registers where values are going to be stored, and architectural registers, okay? Which are the register names that are there in the instruction set, in the instructions, okay? And then I'm going to have a map table that's going to map the architectural register, which is, here I have three, R1, R2, R3, into a physical register, and I have many seven different physical registers over here. So this table is showing me the mapping at this time saying R1 is mapped to P1, so if I want to read the value in register R1, I go to register P1 to get the value, okay? R2 is mapped to P2, R3 is mapped to P3, and right now I have these four physical registers that have nothing in them that are, you know, there's no value, they're free, okay? And so now, see I have this piece of code here, all right, okay? And in this piece of code, where these architectural register names, I have a read after write dependence between this and here, I have this read after write dependence, I have this read after write dependence over here. Then these two instructions are both writing into R3, so I have a write after write dependence here, this instruction is writing into R1, this is reading R1, so I have a write after read dependence over here, okay? Write after write purple, read after write in red, okay? So what I'm going to do is, the way the renaming process works is, when I decode an instruction, I map the register names to physical registers, and for the destination register name, where I'm going to create a new value which is the result of the instruction, I'm going to assign a new physical register to that value, okay? So, working with this map table, when I see this instruction, I will say now instead R2 is P2, R3 is P3, and for R1, I'm going to give it a new physical register, so this add instruction is going to be add P1 to P3 and write the result in P4, okay? And I'm going to change my mapping table to say now R1 is mapped to P4, I'm going to take P4 from this free list, and my free list is going to have now only P5, P6, P7 left, okay? The next instruction is a subtract instruction with these, it's writing into R3, so I'm going to get a new physical register for the output R3, that is going to be P5, I'm going to say R3 is going to be mapped to P5 after this instruction, okay? The inputs are R1 and R2, so R2 is mapped to P2, R1 is mapped to P4, so this subtract becomes subtract P2, P4, write into P5, okay? When I see this multiply instruction, it's going to write to R3, I'm going to get a new physical register, so next I get P6 from the free list, so this multiply destination will be P6, R2 is mapped to P2, R3 is mapped to P5, so this multiply becomes multiply P2 to P5 and write to P6, okay? So when I see this divide, this divide is going to basically, I get a new physical register for R1, which is P7, okay? The input R1 is mapped to P4 over here, so this divide becomes divide P4 by 4 and write the result in P7, okay? And my free list becomes empty and eventually I'm going to have to put registers back in the free list and we'll see how we do all of that later on, okay? So now this piece of code becomes this piece of code and in this piece of code what you see is all the read after write dependencies have been maintained intact and the write after write and write after read have gone, okay? But now I'm using, previously I only had R1, R2, R3, now I have P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, many different registers. This is a bit, you know, we'll come back to this slide again a little bit, but this concept of register renaming we'll implement in different ways when we talk about the Damasulo algorithm and, you know, later on what we do in P6 and MIPSR 10k. Questions? Okay. So what we're going to do is, again, is we're going to do everything in hardware, we're going to have a set of instructions, we're going to have instructions we're going to execute, we're going to fetch them, okay, and dump them into this instruction window, okay? Anytime you see a branch you're going to predict the direction of branch, start fetching instructions from the predicted direction and just dump them into this instruction window, okay? And, you know, if you actually have a misprediction you're going to flush, we'll see how to do that. Then we're going to, forget about memory instructions right now, okay, we're going to rename the registers to avoid these write after write and write after read dependencies, which really are false dependencies, which are an artifact of the small number of register names that I had in my instruction, okay? Then you're going to track to see when the inputs to an instruction are ready. When the inputs to the instruction are ready, I'm going to execute that instruction when the register dependencies are known. Handling memory dependencies is more tricky, we'll see that, you know, towards the middle of next, we'll see that actually after about four lectures. And then, you know, what we'll do is we will, what we call, commit the instruction, let them leave the hardware in order, okay? So they're going to enter processing in order, inside lots of speculative order of order, they're going to leave in order, okay? So as far as the software is concerned, it sees instructions entering in order, being executed one at a time, and it doesn't, you know, it just sees the program execute faster. Current machines these days have, you know, a few hundred instructions in the instruction scheduling window, okay? This is, you know, let's just begin at this Apple M1 over here, you know, it has like 300 and, speculating, 350 physical registers. Only 32 of the architectural registers, you know, RMS, 350 plus physical registers, integer and 300, you know, very large floating point registers, okay? This example that we had, we had three and seven. How does the front end evolve with this development? You're talking like a huge amount of instructions. So, by the way, I asked one of you to ask me a question. What was the wasting of the predicate, like you fetch them in the predicate mode and then do nothing. So, let's go back to predicate execution, okay? You know, predicate execution, by the way, what you're doing is you are like, you know, executing, you're fetching instructions, both that are going to, from one path of the branch and the other. You're fetching from both paths, but you're only executing one. So you end up having a lot of wasted fetch, and which are not execution, okay? Digression. But fetch. So, you know, we talked a little bit about fetching and, you know, fetching past the branch instruction, okay? And how many branches do we predict? And, you know, what do we do to fetch past that? So, people start off wanting to do four instructions at a time, you know, then, you know, more than four instructions at a time. And you actually have, if you want to execute more, you know, you have to sustain or, you know, execute eight at a time, you actually have to fetch more than that because some of them are going to be thrown away because they are not, you know, from a wrong branch direction or whatever it is. So, you want to, you know, people want to fetch eight instructions at a time, and then the question you ask is, we've been saying, hey, you know, what we learned is, hey, we are only doing one branch prediction at a time. So if every six instructions a branch, and you can only predict one branch at a time, then you can only fetch six instructions on the average at a time. So how do you get more than that? First simple is have fewer branches, unroll loops, inline procedures, okay, things like that to reduce the number of branches. So that delays a little bit, but eventually you have to fetch from more than one branch at a time. Okay, and the tricks that are showing up in processes are coming up these days is, you know, you actually have to also design a branch predictor, not to predict the branch that you fetched, but the next branch that is likely to occur. It's complicated. Okay, and something else that we actually did 25 years ago, where you actually start, you start fetching from two different points in the program. So you have two fetchers, one fetching four, the second fetching four, and all that the fetch is doing, as we are talking about now, is just dumping instructions. We'll sort them out later on, how to rename them and execute them. We'll see how to do that later on, okay? It's just dumping instructions into this buffer. So you can actually fetch from, you know, if you have two different fetchers, if each is doing four, collectively you are dumping four instructions, eight instructions, into some buffer from where you can sort them out later on. So they are doing some of that too now, you know, but yeah, this is, and now we talked, showed you, I did not know that actually, but I saw that for the first time when we popped up two lectures ago, the Qualcomm processor, which is basically done by the team that did this Apple processor. They just moved over there, they started their own company, Nubia, they got part by Qualcomm. They are doing 16-point fetchers, so you have to do basically fetching from multiple places. One cache line we don't. No, no, no, no, no. So they have multiple fetchers. One fetching, one cache line, maybe another fetching, another cache line, eight instructions from here, eight instructions from here, porting them all together later on. These instructions could be separated by many other instructions. Yeah, you know, when you have the desire, the impetus to do something and you have smart people, then interesting stuff happens. Okay, so we're going to fetch as many instructions, these are 16, okay, and execute them and commit them, and so these ways, you know, like, so the Apple one that I just showed, it has 600 instruction window. Okay? All right. So if you remember from last time, we talked about issue. Issue is the time at which instructions execute and schedule is the order in which they execute. Okay? And the scheduling was done rearranging the instructions to enable rapid issue, statically done by the compiler, and then, you know, we talked about basics of IPen scheduling and then we talked about techniques to increase the scope. Okay? So, you know, software did all of that and the hardware folks saw the tricks the software people playing, saying, hey, that's what you need to do to get larger scope and more parallelism, let's figure out how to do it. Okay? So the dynamic scheduling is going to rearrange the instructions to reduce the read-after-write stalls, increase the pipeline and functional unit utilization, and export more opportunities for parallel instruction issue. In fact, the original, you know, motivation for out-of-order execution was to increase the utilization of floating point units because floating point units are very expensive. There still are relatively more, quite more expensive integer units, but not as expensive, you know, much, a lot cheaper these days, okay? But you want to make it appear like sequential execution and we'll see how to do that in a second. Okay? That's the big picture of what we're going to do. Okay? So, you know, if you could do a lot of stuff in software, as some people claim, why would you want to build a complex piece of hardware? Many reasons. One is, hey, you know, you don't want to recompile for your machine. The same code just runs across different machines, so there's portability. Further, there's much more information available about the memory addresses and branch directions and cache misses. Okay? We can also have more registers, and that seems, you know, awkward. Why couldn't the software have more registers? Because the software has to have each register, you have to give a name, you have to have bits in the instruction. Here, as the Apple processor has 300-plus physical registers, so I can have more of those. It's also easier to speculate and recover from misspeculation. We'll see how we do that when we talk about the Intel P6 and the MIPSR10k. And we are going to flush instructions that are in processing rather than have recovery code. Okay? So there's no additional code, nothing extra. You know, a compiler can have a larger scope. You know, the compiler people say, hey, you guys are only doing 600 instructions. I could do 2,000. Okay? Maybe do the analysis. You know, if I get past procedure calls, yada, yada, yada. Okay? Well, okay, so that can also be done for hardware. A compiler can do something that I'm saying that the hardware can't use. Okay. So what we'll do is we'll build this whole stuff up in steps. We'll start off with scoreboarding, which was the first out of order. And it did not have register renaming because it did not have register renaming the write-after-write and write-after-read hazards, dependencies called stalls. Okay? Then we'll talk about Tamasulo's algorithm, which adds register renaming and eliminates those. Then we'll talk about handling precise state and speculation with the, you know, P6 style, the R10k style. And, you know, I mean, these days, these are the styles that are used, even now. But they're just many, much bigger, if you will. And then we'll talk about how we handle memory dependencies. Loads of scores that are dependent, which the, you know, we saw we talked about speculative, load speculation and all that. We'll see how we do the equivalent of that in hardware. Do it much better. Okay. So going back to the loop and rolling situation. So what we did is we, you know, combined iterations, scheduled the pipeline, and renamed registers, right? That's what we did. So a very similar thing we will see is going to happen dynamically. But, you know, rather than using SACSP, which we used over there, we are just going to do a, you know, single precision. ZI gets A times XI, just because when we actually draw all the figures, you know, other code will get too big with the examples. Okay. So here is the code for one iteration. And now for future examples going forward, I'm basically going to take code from two iterations of this loop, ignoring the branch. So I'll have load multiply store add immediate and load multiply store, you know, for the next iteration. And we'll use this as our code through the multiple examples that we'll go through. Okay. So we're also going to draw out our pipeline diagrams differently and have newer terminology. Okay. So this was our simple in-order pipeline where we had fetch decode execute right back. Okay. And we are going to assume that we have single cycle integer operations, which includes memory and three cycle floating point operations. That includes addition and multiplication. So we are now instead of doing the, you know, the diagram like this that we were used to. Okay. We are going to draw it out a little differently. We are going to draw it out like yay, where we will have over here the different stages of operation. And these are the instructions. And in each box we will say the cycle number in which that instruction enters that stage. Okay. So here load is decoded in clock cycle one, proceeds to execute in clock cycle two, proceeds to write back in clock cycle three. Multiply then, which is dependent on this, proceeds to decode in clock cycle three, enters execute in clock cycle four. But since it takes three cycles, it's going to be there in clock cycles four, five, and six, which you're simply going to write as C4 plus. And then it's going to write back in clock cycle seven. Okay. The store then is going to get decoded in clock cycle seven. Okay. Execute clock cycle eight and, you know, exit the pipeline in clock cycle nine. Okay. Fairly straightforward. Okay. So now again, going back to the problem that we had was in our pipeline we had a structural hazard where the younger instruction can't pass the older instruction without clobbering it. So what you're going to do is you sort of implement some kind of a passing function. If there's a slow instruction and there's a fast instruction behind, you just sort of, in a sense, step aside and let the faster one go ahead of you. Okay. That's sort of what you're going to do. And the way we're going to do that is we fetch the instructions and then, you know, next thing we did is we decoded right. We're going to break up and what do we do in decode? We figured out what the operands were and read the input registers so we could go to the execute stage. Okay. We are going to break up that decode, if you will, split D into two pieces. In the first piece, D1, you're going to dump all the instructions into this instruction buffer and since you're fetching them in order, you're dumping them into this instruction buffer in order. So slow instructions, fast instructions all sit around over here. Okay. Fast instructions ready to go. It goes ahead and executes while the slow instruction can sit around waiting for its input to be ready. Then from this buffer in the second piece, we are going to send the instructions to the rest of the pipeline and that is going to happen out of order. Okay. So the red part is in order and the blue part is out of order. Okay. What is this instruction buffer? This instruction buffer is basically a bunch of latches holding a lot of information and you can keep dumping instructions. So, you know, here this buffer could have instructions from one iteration of this loop, two iterations of the loop, three iterations of the loop, four or five, it doesn't matter. Okay. As long as the only thing that's going to constrain how many instructions I can have here is the size of the buffer. Okay. So what we do is those two pieces are going to be called dispatch and issue. Dispatch is the first part of decode where you are allocating a slot in this instruction buffer. And now we create another kind of structural hazard. If this instruction buffer is full, then this dispatch has to stall. Okay. And that is done in order so if there is a stall, it propagates to all the other instructions behind. Okay. Issue is the second part of decode where you send instructions from this instruction buffer to the execution units. If an instruction here is waiting to be sent, doesn't mean a later instruction needs to wait. Okay. That is behind it in the instruction buffer needs to wait. Okay. So this wait does not back-crop to the younger instructions. All right. We could also have our floating point, not code, we will, you know, have separate integer registers and floating point registers. So that's sort of the big picture. So, you know, the scheduling scope, the three parts, scheduling scope, do the, you know, rearrange, reschedule the instruction, then do the register renaming, if you will. Okay. The scheduling scope is the instruction buffer. The pipeline scheduling and register renaming is going to be our dynamic scheduling algorithm. Okay. We're going to study two register scheduling algorithms, and we are only going to assume register dependencies between instructions, ignore memory scheduling, which we will do later on. The first one is going to be the scoreboard, and it does not do register renaming, so it has limited scheduling flexibility. Then we'll talk about Tomasulo's, which does renaming, gives more flexibility, more performance. So the scoreboard was first implemented in the CDC 6600 in 1964. You know, this was the, so at that time, basically, IBM was king. IBM was the only company, in a sense, building computers. And then a bunch of people got together and built, you know, a corporation, built a super, you know, at that time, the supercomputer in 1964. It got Thomas Watson really upset at IBM. So they went ahead and started to do their own, like the IBM 360 model 91, which led to Tomasulo's algorithm, which we'll talk about. Okay, so they had 16 separate functional units, seven integer units, four floating point units, and five memory, five points, okay, five memory units. And we've talked about, you know, here, we have a floating point multiplier, floating point adder, and we have pipelining units, okay. They did not have pipelining in their functional units. Why did they not have pipelining in their functional units? Because to have pipelining, you have to have these latches between the different stages. And these latches are going to take some logic, and that's going to be some levels of gates, and that's going to delay, increase the latency of the operation over a non-pipelining, okay. That's why they didn't do that. They also didn't have the register bypassing, because as you'll see, it gets a little more complex, okay. Now, the IBM 36091 came later on. We will see that they had pipelined functional units. Because a gentleman named John Earl figured out how to incorporate the latching function into the logic itself. So there were effectively no delays through the latch, if you will, okay, and that was called an Earl latch. So that was one of the big innovations at that time that allowed later on 36091 and the IBM to have pipelined functional units, all right. We are going to take a very simple version of this. We are only going to have five functional units, one ALU for integer operations, one load unit, one store unit, and two floating point units that are three-cycle and they are pipelined, okay. So now what the scoreboard does, this is the scoreboard. The scoreboard has several data structures. So the CDC 6600, they had a scoreboard algorithm, okay, and the instruction buffer equivalent is what we are going to call a function unit status table, right. So the scoreboard data, so I have a function unit status table which holds an instruction, okay. It holds, the instruction means what is the operation the instruction is going to execute, what are the two source registers of the instruction, what is the destination of the instruction, okay. What functional unit is that instruction going to use when it's going to be executed and whether that entry is busy or not. Really, you know, just like you would have an instruction in a latch, these are the bits of the instruction I need to process the instruction even in order to pipeline the census is what I would have, okay. But then it also has tags associated with each instruction there. There is a tag for the destination register and two tags for the two source registers, okay. The destination register tag is the functional unit that is going to produce the value of this instruction, the output value of this instruction, okay. And the source, then that becomes, that destination register tag of an instruction, that register is input to of some other instructions. For those input registers have tags, so the destination tag of one instruction becomes the input register tag of an instruction that is using that value. Can you explain these tags a little bit more? I'll explain them in gory detail, just wait please. Yes, I have tags set up there right now, who cares what those sort of bits are, we just have sort of bits. How they come about, how they're used, yes, hold on. That's what we're going to spend the rest of the lecture on, okay. It's not a little, in gory detail I'll explain them, so yeah, alright. Then, each register, I'm going to have made, for the set of registers I'm going to have a register status table. The register status table is going to have one entry for each register. That entry for the register is going to also have a tag, okay. What are, what is a tag? Okay, a tag is a set of bits, okay. If the tag is zero, then the meaning is that the value corresponding to that tag, that register, remember there's one tag associated with the register, is there in the register file, okay. If the tag is not equal to zero, then the correct value is not in the register file. Why is it not in the register file? Because the instruction that's creating that value has not executed yet and written its result in the register file. And so, this tag is going to have the identity of the functional unit that is going to be writing into that register, okay. Then I'm also going to have an instruction status table, which is going to basically track what stage of processing is that instruction in. Is it in the issue stage or is it in the execute stage? Okay, so just some piece of hardware with this set of bits we're going to have. So, here are our functional units, okay. Here is our register file. I want to execute a floating point multiply instruction. I read the two input registers, give them to the floating point multiply unit. When it's done, I take the value and write it back into the destination register file, okay. Now I'm going to have my scoreboard data structures on the side, which are going to control when the registers are read, when the instruction executes, and when the value gets written back into the register file, all right. That's the big picture over here. So, here is my functional unit status over here, register status, instruction status. Instruction status, basically a table, one entry for each instruction that I am processing right now, and it will tell me what stage is that instruction in. Okay, if it's an S, the S bit is set. If it's an X, the X bit is set. Register status, one entry per register, and that is a tag value, which is going to be interpreted like A, okay. So, if this tag is zero, means this register has the correct value ready to be read. If this tag is three, means functional unit three is going to be writing the result that will go into this register, okay. Any questions about this? I mean, it's fairly uninteresting. How are you using it to be interesting? I'll give you a few more seconds to stay under this, all right, okay. So now, for each instruction is going to be the two input registers, output register, operation, the tag for the destination register, and the tags for the input register. So now, the pipeline structure we have is the following. Fetch, dispatch, issue, execute, write back, okay. Fetch is the same as before. Dispatch, if you have a structural hazard, what would be a structural hazard? If this structure, this function, there is no entry in this instruction buffer, okay. If I have a structural hazard, I'm going to stall, or if I have a write after write hazard, I'm going to stall. Otherwise, I'm going to allocate an entry in the scoreboard, an entry in the scoreboard of behavior, okay. Issue, issue means I'm going to, in this picture, issue means I'm going to send the instruction from this instruction buffer to the functional unit for issue, okay. So issue means is, if I'm ready to, if I have a read after write hazard, I'm going to wait, okay, but if I'm ready to issue, then I'm going to read the registers and go to execute, okay. So what that means is, when that instruction is ready to issue, we'll send a signal to this functional unit, yes, carry out the floating point multiplication, at the same time, read the register from the register file and give them to the input of it, okay. Execute, well, just execute the operation, but then when you are done, notify the scoreboard, we will see what happens over there. For a write back, then, you know, if there is a write after read hazard, we'll see why it occurs. You're going to wait, we'll see actually how we detect all of this, we'll wait. Otherwise, you're ready to write the result. So basically, the function unit has completed, the multiply has completed, okay, and you're trying to write back. If the scoreboard says, hey, no, there is a write after read hazard, okay, this function, you do not write the result back, the register file, you wait, you stall. If the scoreboard gives the go ahead, then you will write the result back in that register file, okay. So you write the result, if there is no write after read hazard, and then, once you've written back the result, the instruction is done, so you free that scoreboard entry. And what we are assuming is, you can do a write back and clear a write after read dependent issue in the same cycle, and also, you do the write back and free the scoreboard entry so that a new instruction can use the scoreboard entry so that it clears the structural dependent dispatch in the same cycle, okay. Now let us see what we are going to do in each one of these stages with that hardware structure and how the tags come around, et cetera, et cetera. So dispatch, either you stall or you allocate the scoreboard entry, all right. So you stall if either there is a write after write or a structural hazard. Otherwise, you allocate a scoreboard entry. So this is the scoreboard entry that you're allocating, okay. So you're saying, hey, this is the two source registers, this is the destination register, this is the operation that's going to be carried out, okay. Then what you further do is, you go to this register status table, read the tags for the two source registers, R1 and R2, and copy them into the two T1 and T2 tag fields of that entry, all right. This scoreboard entry now is going to correspond to executing the instruction in a particular function unit, okay. That now becomes the identity of this scoreboard entry becomes a tag, which is the tag of the destination result of this instruction, that register, okay. So you go and put the tag for the destination register in the register status table, okay. We'll see with the example exactly when we write up that piece of code exactly what goes on, okay. And then you also, this is the tag for the destination T over here. Questions so far? So those status registers are going to either have the functional unit when it's being operated on or it's the instruction sitting in the table? No, yes, yes, but no, okay. See, the tag is going to have a non-zero bit, non-zero value corresponding to, oh, the tag is going to have a non-zero value if there is an instruction that is writing to the register that is still in processing. So it's either in the, you know, functional status table or as it is in processing in the functional units. When the value gets written into the register, tag is going to be made zero. So if the tag for a register is zero, it also means that the value for the register is there in that register file, okay. Very simply, tag zero, value in register file, tag non-zero, you're waiting for the value to be created and written into the register file. Let's say we have a bunch of right after rights. That would mean that the destination register would continuously be updated with the various functional units in the register status T, right? When we take the example, a lot of that will become clear. Okay, so hold on to that question after that point, okay. Okay, any questions about dispatch, do these three things. In issue, you wait for the read after write register hazards to clear. Okay, and when those hazards have cleared, you read the registers. Okay, read these two registers, send them to the function unit, and let the function unit do its thing. How do you know that read after write register hazards have this instruction? This instruction over here was waiting for two input registers. How do you know that the input values are ready? That means you know read after write register hazards, okay. You know the input values are ready. For the input values to be ready means they have to be in the register file, okay. Which means that the tags for those registers have to be zeroed, okay. So, when an instruction is executing and done executing, okay, the tag for that instruction is compared against the tags, all the tags in this function unit status table. If the tag matches, you clear it, okay. So now, when the instructions tags are, both tags are cleared, you know that instructions read after write hazards have been cleared. The values are in the register file. You can go ahead and execute that instruction. Are you with me on this? It will become clearer when you do the example. So that's when you issue the instruction to the function unit, okay. So what's happening now is I have many instructions in this instruction buffer, if you will. A tag comes of an instruction that just completed. I compare the tags against the tags of all the instructions that are waiting, and if there is a match, I clear it. Now, when both the input tags of an instruction are zeroed, that instruction is ready to issue, okay. Or in some other terminology, you can say you wake that instruction up, okay. Now, multiple instructions could get woken up at the same time. Which one should you choose? And that is what is called the issue policy. So, you know, it's safe to always, like, figure out, hey, whichever is the one that entered this buffer in the first, oldest one. That may not be that safe, but, you know, another policy is, hey, issue the one that's going to have the longest latency. You know, that may actually be, you know, better performance. And you can have a variety of different issue policies, okay. Say that you have w instructions over here, okay. What you have to do now is to pick out one of them to issue, if you can only do one at a time, right. And the way you do it, so you have to have a select logic, which selects amongst all the different instructions, which can go ahead and issue. That's called a select logic. Okay, so later on when we talk about, you know, bypassing, someone will wake up and select logic, okay. Select is selecting which instruction to issue. And that ends up being a priority encoder of some kind. You have w instructions and you have some priority and you pick one of them. W is the window size or the number of scoreboard entries, okay. If you are having now a, you know, four issue if you will, okay. And say my window size is 200 instructions, I have to select four out of 200. So the logic becomes quite involved. Next is execute. For execute, what you do is you simply execute the instruction, then the tag of the instruction, okay, you know, is available here. When the instruction is the right back, what you have to do is you have to wait for the right after read hazard to clear. We'll see why that becomes important, okay. When that hazard is cleared, you write the value into the register file, which register number you do, you write it into this register number over here. You clear the tag of this register status entry to zero. Zero means the value is there in this register, correct value, okay. And then you compare the tag to the waiting instruction input tags of all the different instructions. If they match, you clear that relevant input tag. And then you free this scoreboard entry. Go through this example and figure it out. So here's this piece of code and we're going to go cycle by cycle. First clock cycle, this load gets dispatched. It gets dispatched to the scoreboard, okay. So you go and take a look at, you know, initially all the entries in the functional unit status are empty. They're not busy. You dispatch this load to this load entry over here. So you allocate that entry, okay. Register status, everything else clear. The tags are all zero, all right. So then what you do is you go to the input of the input register of this load, read the register status, zero, okay. So the tag is zero here, clear, okay. There is no second input tag is clear, okay. This register number that this load is is R1 over here, R2. The destination register of this load is F1, okay. You go to the register status table and say tag of F1 now is this load over here. Very straightforward. Next cycle, this load in the functional unit status table, both its inputs are ready, okay. So next cycle it can issue. Clock cycle two it can issue. Multiply gets dispatched. Multiply goes to say this entry in the functional unit status table, say FP1. So you allocate that FP1. FP1 has inputs F0 and F1. You go to register status table with F0, clear. Tag is clear. Go to register status table with F1, okay, load. Tag is load. Tag is load. None zero, okay. Go to register status table and this is allocated FP1 unit. You go to register status table with FP2 and set the status bits, tag bits to be FP1, okay. Clock cycle three, this load goes to execute. What else is there in the instruction buffer? There is this floating point multiply instruction. Its tag is not zero, so it can't proceed to issue. So it waits in the instruction buffer. You dispatch the store. So the way you dispatch the store is you dispatch it, the functional unit status entry for the store entry is free. So you allocate it. Store input register is R1. So you go to register status, clear. So the tag is clear, okay. Second store input is F2. You go to register status, tag is FP1. Second tag is FP1, okay. Two register inputs are R1 is F2, R2 is R1, and there is no destination register and the operation you're getting out is store, and now this entry is busy. So far so good. Clock cycle four, load. Clock cycle four, load proceeds to write back. It proceeds to write back because there is no write after read hazard right now. And we'll see the situation when it occurs, okay. So it proceeds to write back, okay. And it proceeds to write back. So several things happen. First is you write the result into this, you know, this load is going to write the result into register F1, okay. So you go to register F1, and then previously the tag was load, you clear it, okay. And now the register is written into F1, so the tag for F1 in the register status table is clear, okay. And you also free this entry in the function unit status table, okay. This tag also is compared to all the tags of the waiting instructions over there, all right. So this tag is also compared to all the waiting instructions. This one has the tag of load, okay. That tag matches, okay. So you clear that tag. To indicate now this F1, okay, is ready there, values ready there in the register file. The tag for the second input register F0 was zero. Means that it was already there. So now both F0 and F1 are there in the register file, okay, with correct values. So this multiply can be dispatched, all right. You dispatch the multiply, and the store, its input tag is FP1, which is not cleared, okay. So it's still waiting. Nothing can happen to it. And now you try and dispatch this add immediate instruction. This add immediate instruction would go to this ALU slot. It's free. So you allocate that, okay. And the inputs are R1. You go to the register status with R1. It's clear. So that tag is clear. But then now the destination is also R1. So then you go and set the status, the tag for R1 in the register status table to be ALU. Okay, questions? Yeah. In this case, it's reading from R1 and also writing to R1. So it's setting R1's status to ALU. But how do you order that? What if it writes the status of R1 first and then it says read it to be ALU? The same instruction? Yeah. No, no. You have to do the design. So you read the tags for the inputs first. Okay. So you read the register status table in the first half of the clock cycle, for example, and write it in the second half of the clock cycle. The register will always update the register status file, whereas the R1 and R2 will just perform a simple lookup on the file. The input registers will go and read the input tags, the tags corresponding to the register status table. For the destination, you will update the tag. Next half of the cycle. Yeah. It's a very small case. The status thing? It's not even a suggested, it's not even a cache. It's a directory. Okay. You say you have 32 entries over here. That's five bits. Okay. So it will just be a five-bit tag. Okay. Other questions? By the way, this stuff, after lecture, go through it on your own. Convince yourself it's working, especially for the next two or three lectures, all the stuff that we go through, okay? It's actually beautiful. Okay. Clock cycle five. Clock cycle five. So what happened in the clock cycle four? In clock cycle four, the tag is cleared, so the multiply is ready to issue. So in clock cycle five, multiply starts to exist. Store is still waiting for its tag to be cleared, which is FP1, which is not going to get cleared until this instruction writes back. Okay? This add instruction, which was in, now, this slot over here, its tags are both zero. So it can issue in the next cycle. And you can, the load comes around. This load slot is free, so you can dispatch this load and allocate that entry in the functional unit status table for the load. Okay? This load has inputs R1 and writes into F1. So you will go to the register status table, read the tag for R1. So this loads tag is going to be ALU, okay? And the, it's going to write into F1, so you will go to the register status table and update the tag for F1 to be load. Okay? Clock cycle six, multiply is executing. It takes three cycles, so five, six, seven is going to be executing. Add, the add, its tags are clear, so it can, it issued, it starts executing in clock cycle six. Okay? This load is waiting for F1 to be, sorry, R1 to be ready, which is not going to be ready until this add is completed execution, so it waits, and it can't be issued. And now we fetch this multiply, what to do with them. This multiplies, is going to write into F2. You go and take a look at the register status table, which means there is another instruction waiting to write into F2, which means if I dispatch this instruction, I'm going to have a write after write hazard. Okay? So, you stall this multiply because of the write after write hazard, which we can't deal with in this case. Okay? So, you stall this multiply because we only have a fixed set of registers, and we don't do register renaming. Are you with me on this? In clock cycle seven, multiply is still executing, store is waiting for the multiply, add has finished execution, so should I let the add go to write back? Okay? If I let the add go to write back, and update R1 over here, the store hasn't been issued, and it hasn't been executed. It hasn't read its value of R1. So, I will be updating the value of R1 and not lying the store to get the correct value of R1. Okay? So, I have a write after read hazard. So, I have to stall this multiply so I have to stall this add instruction and not let it write into R1 until this store has read its R1 over here. Okay? Are you with me on this? How do I know that there is going to be a write after read hazard if I, hazard violation, if I let this add go over here? Okay? So, basically, what I need to do is I need to check to see is there another instruction in the scoreboard that is using R1 as an input? Okay? And the corresponding tag is non-zero. It's not clear. Okay? So, there is this instruction. Sorry, sorry, sorry. And its tag is clear. If a tag were not clear, I would have a write after write. Okay? So, yes, there is a match for R1. And its tag is zero, means that, hey, this value of R1 is there in the register file. When the store issues, it will actually read that value, and it's waiting to read that value. So, I cannot update that value. Are you with me on this? Think through this one especially after lecture. We can, you know, if you have any questions, ask again, all right? Clock cycle eight. Just multiply. Write back. Okay? So, you go ahead and clear the tag for F2 over here and the rest of status. Store can go ahead and issue. Add still has to wait because this one, you know, still has to basically proceed to execute, so the new value of R1 could be written. It's reading the new value of R1. Still waiting to read the, reading the new value of R1. Now, let's multiply. You see this F2 tag clear. Okay? So, now I can, and I have a slot for the multiply here, so I can dispatch this multiply and read the tag for F0, which is clear. Tag for F1 is load, and then I set the tag for F2 to be. Okay? So, I cleared the tag for F2. When the first multiply got done, then I, you know, because this was, and then I, you know, F1 is ready. I also issued the store instruction. Free this scoreboard and allocate the scoreboard. Yeah? The choice of using the busy flag is just to reduce, like, the sentinel values you need in the scoreboarding time, because, like, zeroing out the scoreboard or emptying it out, I assume that requires a special state of being empty, so I guess the busy flag gets rid of that by just saying not busy means the row is empty? Yes. Okay. Yeah. No, I mean, this is just a way to know whether you have a slot to allocate something. But also, like, you just make sure you don't have to have the empty state in, like, off. You don't have an empty off. Nor the previous value, not busy. Yes. If the bit is, you know, not busy, all the other bits are meaningless. Okay. Meal less. Stop here and then go to the remainder of the cycles next time. And continue from there.
