Title: 752_Lec20
Source file: 752_Lec20.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

accesses to the page table so that you aren't going and accessing the page table all the time, all right? So, you know, if you have to carry out an address translation for every load or every store, you don't want to be walking through five levels of the page table and just making five other memory accesses to carry out the translation for this address. So what you're going to do is you're going to walk through those, you know, figure out what page table entry you want and then you're going to want to cache it in a special cache and that cache we're going to call a translation look-aside buffer or a translation buffer. Okay, and what this translation buffer is going to be, TLB is going to be, the data in the TLB is going to be the page table entry. Okay, for the time being, it's going to be a physical page frame, but in addition, it's going to be some additional bits. And you're going to access this cache, the address you're going to give to this cache is going to be the virtual page number to see if this virtual page number, the translation for that virtual page number is there in the TLB. Okay, it's typically small and you want it to hit a lot, so it's going to be fully associative typically. All right, or high associativity, and we'll see examples in a little while. Okay, and, you know, it exploits the fact that, you know, we saw there was spatial locality in a block of 64 bytes or 128 bytes, okay. A page size is going to be 4 kilobytes or more than 4 kilobytes, 4 kilobytes is typical, so there is a fair amount of spatial locality that you can exploit and get, you know, want to get very high hit rates. If you do not find an entry in the TLB, then you have to go back and go through the page table and get to the correct entry, and then end up caching it. Okay, the TLB miss, basically, you know, going and walking through that page table, you can either do it software people have, you know, suggested doing it in software, where you write a small, TLB miss handler, a small routine to, you know, do that, unlike some other exception handlers that you call the operating system, this one, you don't bother the operating system, you just have a very quick call to this TLB handler without bothering the operating system too much, in some sense. You bother the operating system a little bit, but not too much over here. Okay, but, you know, alternatively, you can actually, you know, what the TLB miss handler is doing is basically, you know, going and going to this memory address, adding an offset, reading something from here, going to some other memory, adding an offset, reading something, et cetera, et cetera. Okay, until you get to the root entry and get that TLB entry. So that can also be done in a hardware finite state machine. So what the hardware finite state machine does is the address, root address of the root page table over here. Okay, it stores in a hardware register. Okay, and then this part is also stored, you know, this is one page. This page is kept around, okay, and you store the page table root in a hardware register, and this page table root and all the table pointers, all these pointers over here are maintained as physical addresses. So even though those are memory references, you don't have to carry out a, you know, virtual to physical translation. All right, so, you know, the actual page table, this actual entries of this page table, you know, as this, these are just normal memory addresses. Okay, they are virtual addresses, but you are keeping around the actual physical addresses that those virtual addresses be transferred to. These are going to be there, they start out on the disk, end up in memory, end up in the caches. Okay, they are just like any other memory location. Okay, so, you know, the reads of that page table are going to use the standard cache hierarchy, and so it allows the, you know, the caching to speed up the search of that page table. Question to ask is, hey, if this, you know, in a TLB mess, you are going through making repeated memory accesses to actually get to that root, what if those have a TLB mess? One of those accesses have a TLB mess. Okay, so, you know, several options, you can actually allow recursive TLB messes. You know, it's a little tricky, but you could do it. Okay, another potential solution is you can actually lock the TLB entries for the page table into the TLB. Okay, make sure they are not evicted, so there is no TLB mess for them. And, you know, all these solutions that I talk about, people have tried in different situations, it depends on your situation. And the alternative that is, you know, use is to, hey, for those walking to the page table, the accesses you make are actually physical addresses, so you are storing the physical addresses, so you don't have to carry out a virtual to physical address translation as you are handling the TLBs. Okay, and so, you know, when things started out, when things started out, you know, people said, look, you know, TLB messes, I can have a little software team, and so, you know, when I am going to stop my running my program, if you will, go handle this handler and come back. Okay, and that is fine if you had a simple five-stage pipeline, okay, where you want that many instructions in flight. Now, if you have now, you know, like two, three, four, five hundred instructions in flight, okay, you cannot stall everything, in a sense, and go handle that TLB mess and, you know, come back. So that pushes more towards sort of having a little hardware solution, the hardware TLB walker that allows the other stuff to just keep happening as it is, okay, and, you know, some of the other things that you have to worry about in doing things like this is, you know, you are using certain control registers over here, you know, and the state needs to, how the state gets spread out, et cetera, et cetera, it gets a little more complicated, and so these days the push has been, especially for the big out of order machines, to carry out the TLB mishandling in a hardware financing machine, and as I showed you, you know, in some of the current process of you actually can handle multiple TLB, what was it, eight or something, then I showed you that the Qualcomm process. Okay, any questions so far? Okay, so now let's step back a little bit and see, I have a TLB, I have a cache, I have some number of entries in the TLB, I have some base odds, okay, and what I'd like to do is, you know, if I'm going to access some data, if it's in my cache, I'd like to be able to just simply get it out of the cache and nothing else gets in the way anymore, okay, but now we know that we are making a virtual address, that has to be translated to a physical address, how is that going to be done? It's going to be, I'm going to access the TLB, and if I have a hint in the TLB, things are good, if I have a miss in the TLB, I have to go through some other stuff, okay, excuse me a minute, so what I'd like to do is, I'd like to make sure that somehow, if my data is going to be in the cache, I don't want to get a TLB miss, I'd like to get a TLB hit, otherwise the TLB is just, the data is there in the cache, I just can't get to it because of the TLB miss, okay, so that brings up the notion of TLB reach, the TLB reach is how many entries, how much memory can the TLB keep the virtual to physical address translation for, okay, if I have a 64 entry TLB and I have a 4K page size, okay, that TLB can basically keep mappings for 264 kilobytes of memory, okay, and these days that's less than a L2 cache size, so if I have a 64 entry TLB with 4 kilobyte pages, I can have data in the cache that I don't have an active translation for in the TLB, so that's not necessarily good, so you know, what do we do, okay, so one of the things that people propose is they propose having page sizes that are much bigger, okay, so if I had 4 megabyte page sizes, then the TLB reach is 256 megabytes, but now, you know, if I have a single 4 megabyte page, that basically means I must be allocating memory at least in 4 megabyte chunks, and there ends up being a lot of internal fragmentation, memory that is wasted does not use, okay, and then people propose that, hey, I can have multiple different page sizes, okay, I can have 4 kilobyte page size, you know, 2 megabyte page size, you know, whatever it is, you know, 128 kilobyte page size, whatever, okay, in fact RISC-V I think is proposing we use all powers of 2 page sizes, okay, and, you know, at least for 30 years I've been seeing people say, hey, the 4 kilobyte page size is too small because of the TLB reach problem, et cetera, okay, we'd like to have larger page sizes, okay, but then, you know, the software has to use a lot of page sizes, the operating system doesn't use a lot of page sizes, and so people have been trying to get rid of these 4 kilobyte page sizes, haven't been able to so far, okay, because a lot of software built that is using 4 kilobyte page sizes, okay, so, you know, what seems to be common is like, you know, okay, I'll give you 2 page sizes, 4 kilobyte which you, sorry, the software has to use, a lot of software has built with that, and maybe if you can you use a 2 megabyte page size, okay, so say I only have 2 different page sizes, now when I go and access the TLB I have to know what the page size is, okay, so what they do is, you know, and that increases you have to have a much different associativity, accessing different tags, et cetera, et cetera, so what a lot of machines do that support 2 different page sizes, they'll have 2 TLBs, say a 64 entry TLB for 4 kilobyte page sizes, and maybe a 4 entry TLB for 2 megabyte page sizes, you can access both of them at the same time, and then figure out what is the correct page size, okay, another thing people use is to basically now have 2 levels of TLB, okay, a small fast one backed up with a bigger one, okay, and many a times you can access both of them at the same time, all right, and so these days second level TLBs of 2K, 3K, 4K are reasonably common, that now gets you more entries, so say I had a 1K entry level 2 TLB with a 4K page size, that's 4 megabytes the record map, so that's going to maybe cover my L2 caches if you will, okay, another solution people have posed is to actually keep a software version of the TLB, a software cache, okay, and you know it's smaller and much faster than page table access, but you know this is really in a sense the solution that is more common today. Questions? Yeah? In regards to larger page sizes, it was my understanding that a lot of languages nowadays, they have their runtime only get the operating system to give them new pages when it's absolutely necessary, they try to be very conservative with it where they only get one page and they split it up into sort of like micro pages in a sense, like every time you would call a memory allocate, it would just give you a little bit of a page and just keep track of how much data for that page has taken up. What you said, several languages and runtimes try and do that, most common software doesn't mind. If you can try and basically do your allocation so there is less fragmentation in the page regardless of the page size, that's a win, okay, but you know some people are studying this more, actually it would be interesting if you're doing a project on some of that related to page size, actually do an analysis of how much data on the page that you actually end up accessing, it's not that big, okay, 10% or something like that. Okay, so we all know what page faults, you heard about them, a page fault means that page table entry is not in the page table because the page is not there in memory. You start out as a TLB miss, it's going to be detected by the, and then you go to the, the finite state machine detects the miss, and then you call the operating system which will do a fair amount of work to figure out which page should be replaced, and if that page is dirty, write it to your desk, read the missing page from the desk, and it takes a few milliseconds these days. In the meantime, the operating system can swap out, schedule another task on the CPU because it's millions of clock cycles. And when the page gets the returns, and you get the page from the memory and put it in the, from the desk and put it in the memory, update the page table, then you treat it as a fair amount of that you've seen, but now let's make things a little more interesting, okay, given our knowledge about caches, et cetera, so far. So the memory hierarchy that we've been documenting so far assumes what are called physical caches. What does that mean? The cache that is accessed using physical addresses, okay? The index to access into the cache is bits from a physical address. The tag that is stored in the cache is bits from the physical address, all right? So here's my level one cache, level two cache, whatever, okay? The main memory is being accessed by physical addresses, level two cache is being accessed by physical address, the level one cache is also being accessed by physical addresses, and so I have to have TLVs to convert from the virtual address, translate from the virtual address to the physical address, as we just saw, okay? The nice thing about this structure is that, you know, there is only one copy of data at a given physical address in memory, and if I'm caching that data with the physical address, there's only going to be one place in each level of the cache that it's going to end up, okay? If I have, you know, inclusion, by the way, multi-level inclusion, you know, the data could be, if the data is in the level one cache, it's going to be the L2 cache, and if I replace something from the L2 cache, then I have to go and evict that corresponding data from the L1 cache, okay? So there is only one place a particular address, data from a particular address could be in the L2 cache or in the L1 cache, okay? The problem is now I have to translate the virtual address to the physical address before I access the cache, and that is going to increase the latency, and remember, this is the latency I wanted to be very fast, right? Here, now I'm carrying out the ELB access before I access this, I'm slowing down every accessor. So what people have proposed is what are called virtually address caches, which are, you know, or virtual caches, where you access the cache using a virtual address, you index into the cache the virtual address, it's tagged also with a virtual address, and only when you have a miss do you need to access the ELB to get a physical address, because the L2 cache you're going to access with the, or the main memory you're going to access with a physical address, okay? Are you with me on this? Okay. So this is something that people have proposed for a long time, and people have repeated interest in this these days. Why do they have repeated interest in this these days, okay? The reason why they have repeated interest in these days, if you compare this picture and this picture, you know, the latency over here is going to be higher than the latency over here, okay? When people say, okay, yeah, latency of cache access fine, if I have my out of order process of this way, maybe I can tolerate one more cycle of latency, but here I'm accessing the ELB or expending the energy to access the ELB on every access, here I'm expending energy to access the ELB only on every miss, and the ELBs actually end up taking a fair amount of energy, they're highly associative, okay? So I'm reducing the energy access over here, so this virtual cache is something that, you know, there's a lot of interest, more interest, et cetera, and, you know, these days people are doing some of the virtual caches, but it causes problems, and let us see what problems it causes, okay? Are you doing this, what are virtual, will you take quickly time caches? Okay, so, you know, say I have some process B1 and some process B2, okay? And, you know, I'm going to run them on the same processor, you know, in a different time slot, you know, doing a, you know, running different processes at different times on the machine, okay? And this process has access to the whole 2DN address space, this has access to the whole 2DN address space, this process has its own stack starting at some memory address x, this process has its own stack, you know, starting at some memory address, the same memory address, okay? All right? When this process is running, say this memory address gets mapped to, this is the virtual address, virtual address x gets mapped to physical address y, okay? And when this process is running, okay, this virtual address x gets mapped to physical address. What's going to happen now is that virtual addresses, okay, from different processes are going to end up in the, if I'm accessing the cache with the virtual address, they are going to end up in the cache corresponding to address x, but these are different physical locations. So in the same location, the virtual address cache, I can have mapped data from two different physical address locations if that corresponds to the same virtual address in two different processes, okay? And that is what is called a homonym in a virtual address cache, where the data from different physical addresses is going to end up in the same virtual address in the cache if I'm only accessing the cache only with the virtual address, okay? So what to do? What you can do is you can say is, look, every time I do a context switch, I go from one process to the next process, I just clean out the cache, flush the cache, okay? Then I don't have this problem. That ends up being too much, you know, flushing the cache, you know, whatever it is, bringing stuff back, et cetera, et cetera. Another solution is to basically, you know, access the cache with the PID, add the process ID to that virtual address, okay? So you're going to access the cache not only with the virtual address bits, but attach to that the process ID, okay? So now this X of process one will be accessed with process one, address X. This will be process two, address X. And these are different addresses, different ways of accessing the cache. So these data will end up at different places. So homonyms are, homonyms are, it takes, so the tag size increases. You have to add the process ID, so the number of, you know, the tag size increases. But, you know, you can handle homonyms in a virtual address with the tag cache without having to flush the cache. Any questions on this? Any questions? What becomes a problem is not homonyms, but synonyms, okay? So say I have, you know, two processes sharing data, where one is trying to pass data to another one, okay? So, you know, process one is writing to virtual address X, okay? That gets mapped to physical address Z, okay? Process two is reading the data that this process passed, but it doesn't read from virtual address Y. And what the operating system will do is it will also map virtual address Y to the same physical address. So as this process is writing from X, it's writing to Z. This process is reading from Y, it's reading from Z, okay? So that communication is happening. If I use a virtual address cache, okay, this data is the common data between this process and this process, X and Y. This data will end up in the virtual address cache and address X for this process and address Y for this process, okay? So, you know, here is my virtual address cache, here is address X, virtual address Y, okay? The same data is now present in multiple locations. So if I do a write to X, the data will go here. If I do a write to read from Y, I'll read from here, which is not the data that got written over here. And this is a problem to deal with. And so because of the synonym problem, so I'm talking about, you know, like sharing, but there are other scenarios that can happen. Like if you're doing some I.O. and you're doing a DMA access to memory, okay? You know, where multiple virtual addresses map to the same physical address, they're going to end up in different places. So this is, you know, the most important reason. It's quite complex to handle, okay? We had, we proposed this solution a few years ago that is much simpler, but, you know, but in general it's quite complex to handle. Okay, it means you need to detect whether X and Z and Y are the same and whatever, okay? And then move things around or, you know, it's complicated. So this is one of the reasons why, you know, virtually indexed, virtually tagged caches haven't been found in place. Okay, what does happen is the problem. So what I'd like to do is I'd like to maybe not access the, you know, in the physical address cache I have to access the DLB before I access the cache, you know, and that is an issue. Virtually indexed cache, you know, I can access the DLB after the cache, which is going to be a mess, but getting that to work right is complicated. Maybe I can have a design that I can access the DLB and the cache in parallel at the same time. Then I am not increasing the latency of a hit for the cache. Alright, so, you know, I'm going to access the DLB in parallel and I can do that in small caches and I'll see it in gory detail. Okay, next couple of slides. If the, you know, the index that I'm using to access the cache in a physically address cache and the index bits in the virtual are the same, then I can actually use the virtual address to index into the cache, read the data in the tags, carry out the translation, but the tags are tagged with physical addresses, okay? So in a sense, I am doing effectively an access which corresponds to accessing with the physical address, but not the entire physical address, okay? And there is no context switching areas and problems, you know, data is only ending up in one place and it's also no additional hit cycles, which is very commonly used. How does this work? How does this work? I'm going to skip this in every text, okay? So the way this works is the following, okay? An address has a set of bits, 32 bits, okay? If you're using the address to access the cache, some number of bits are as wide offset, some are the index into the cache to select the set, and the remainder are the tag that gets stored in that selected block frame. Forget the cache, okay? What we just talked about is to access a TLB, it's the same 32 bits of address, but instead what I'm doing is I'm saying, hey, you know, let's just say I have a 64 kilobyte page, some number of bits are a byte within the page, and the remaining bits are a virtual page number, okay? You know, so I'm using those bits to access these structures. I can access, and I get a TLB hit in a mess, okay? I can access, I can access the cache in parallel and get to the right place in parallel, okay? So again, these are the bits, the red bits are the ones I'm using to access the TLB, the green bits, the address I'm using to access the cache, okay? So if there is no intersection between the red and green bits, okay, I can access the TLB and the cache in parallel, okay? Or in other words, if the index bits, so remember that when I go from a virtual address to a physical address, virtual page gets transferred to a physical page, the page offset bits stay the same. So if my index into the cache can be derived from these page offset bits, I can use the page offset bits from the virtual address, start the cache access, and then check to see if I hit, by that time I'll have the physical address, the tag will be a physical address, okay? Again, what I'm doing is I'm trying to make sure that the index bits still stay within these page offset bits. I do not want to have the index bits overlap with the virtual page number bits, because those virtual page number bits are going to get transferred to physical page number bits, okay? And I can do that by selecting the associativity of the cache appropriately so that these index bits are a subset of the page offset bits, okay? And the rule basically is if I have a cache of a certain size, I divide it by the associativity of the cache. That has to be less than or equal to the page size, okay? Again, you know, this is the page size. This is the page size, and the index bits are going to be basically the number of sets I have in the cache, okay? And the number of sets I have in the cache is the cache size divided by the number of ways. Or alternatively, the number of sets times the number of ways is the cache size, and the number of ways is the associativity, okay? And so, you know, basically the, you know, associativity times page size is going to be the cache size, or the cache size, or the associativity is going to be the cache size divided by the page size. Are you with me on this? This is the ZenPythe. We have the instruction cache, and this is the Dane's 4 kilobyte pages, okay? Instruction cache, 32 kilobytes. Associativity is 32 divided by 4 kilobytes. 8-bit, okay? The data cache is, you know, 48 kilobytes in size. Page size is 4 kilobytes, so 48 divided by 4, 12-bit. So they can carry out that parallel, you know, tag TLB access, all right? If I go to this, the Qualcomm one, instruction cache is 192 kilobytes, 6-way, and they have 4K pages, all right? So this, 192 by 4, is more than 6. So they aren't doing that parallel trick here, okay? The data cache is, very similarly, data cache, 96 kilobytes, 6-way, 4K pages, okay? So they aren't also necessarily doing that trick over here, okay? So for kids, why not, in some sense? Well, I mean, for one, in different use cases, but also, you know, the tricks. Not the trick, I mean, what they do is, and I don't know whether they do it in tech or not. I do not know what's in there, okay? So I know what does the tricks people play, and it's likely that's what's happening over there, too. And what they do is, they have a micro TLB, you know, four, eight entries, whatever it is, that they can start accessing when they do the address calculation. And so, you know, there may be, you pay a little latency over here, but it's a micro TLB, a very small TLB, okay? And it's, and they, you know, I think they also would access the regular TLB in parallel, and do, just like they had the, you know, big and small branch predictors, one correcting the BTBs, and, you know, they would correct where they missed over there. And then you may say, look, you know, okay, you know, help me out a little bit, can you, why is such a small TLB going to work, too? For instructions, consider instructions. If I'm just doing instructions, and I have only a one entry TLB for instructions, which basically means it's just keeping the translation of the last, same translation as last time, which would work fine, as long as the instructions are on the same page, which ends up more than 90% of the time. And very similarly, you know, you know, if you had, you know, you access a data structure, you know, you're making access to fields on the data structure, it's going to be in the same page, okay? So they can, they make that trade-off, and they get by with that, a little bit over there, but this, in general, you know, doing this parallel access is very, very common. And we saw it with the Z5, it's using it. And further also, actually, you know, I mean, another motivation for that is if I do have larger page sizes, the offset bits are bigger, then I have more, I can have larger caches, too. Are you with me on this? We like a very non-operating system. They could have just seen that 99% of the market is just this, and I looked at Android, I talked with them. I don't, their design was intended for servers. At least, you know, that's until they, and then they got no litigation, okay? But no, no, the ARM processor, they seem to like having these, the micro-Nano-TLBs, as they call them. So basically, the same old, you know, have risk, go fast, do more? No, no, no, no, you know, it's not necessarily that. It's, you know, how the exact, you know, which sub-cycle, the access happens, this happens, which circuit trick you use over here, you know, it depends on your particular situation, okay? But this Nano-TLB trick, actually even the Intel processors are bad in some situations, okay? So sometimes you use it, but, you know, otherwise, that's not it. Okay, other questions? Now let me actually throw out something else, too. Here's a virtual page number. Here's the page offset, okay? And translating it to some physical page number, same page offset, okay? And then what I also just said is, hey, you know, I have, you know, I'm accessing the cache, and here's the index of the cache, and here is the, you know, the, whatever it is, you know, offset by, you know, block offset over here. And what I want to make sure is now, these bits are a subset of these bits. Why so? Because then these bits are going to be the same as these bits, and so I can use the bits from the virtual address and start accessing the cache. The other thing that I could potentially do is tell the operating system that, hey, normally the virtual and physical page mapping, we said it's fully associated, okay? Why so? Because the iterative is if you want it to be, you know, as low as possible. Oh, sorry, misread as low as possible. What I could do is I could say, do the mapping between virtual pages and physical pages so that some number of bits, lower order bits, say two bits, is the same. So I'm not restricting. I'm not allowing any virtual page to be mapped onto any physical page, okay? I have different colors of virtual pages, and I have, you know, I have four different colors of virtual pages, and I have four different colors of physical page frames in the memory. And I'm only going to allow, you know, a page of a certain color to be in a page frame of the same color, okay? So the bottom bits don't change, okay? And this is a technique called page covering that, you know, BITS had originally proposed. What this lets you do now is it gives you a few more bits that don't change as part of the translation. So I can start accessing the cache with the virtual address bits, and I get a few more, you know, in this case, two more bits. Two more bits doesn't seem like a big deal, but it's four X the cache size, okay? Now you're going to do this if you completely control the whole ecosystem, hardware, software ecosystem. And, but then, you know, what gives, you know, I'm saying, hey, you know, the whole point of this translation is to reduce the number of misses. Well, memory sizes have been increasing too, significantly, okay? So if my memory sizes are getting bigger and bigger, then if I go from a fully associative mapping to a slightly, you know, a highly set associative mapping that is not fully associative, it's not going to make that much of a difference. Also something that, you know, people have played with. Questions? So in a sense, to summarize it, you know, the PLB organization, you have, you know, ABCs over there. They can be Level 2 TLBs, and we talked about, you know, the rule of thumb that TLBs should try and at least cover the L2 cache. So if now you have an address translation that you have to do, then, you know, you can do other things with that. So, you know, what's your memories? If you put us today, these days, paging is the most common. People talk about segmentation. I'm not going to go into any of that. It's like you take 537, you learn more about that. Okay? But once you now have a translation process that you have to carry out anyway, then can I overload that process to bring in some other functionality? Okay? And that other functionality these days is actually even more important than the translation process. Okay? And that other functionality is going to basically allow memory protection and isolation. And let me briefly talk about what this is. And for our purposes, all that it means is in the page table, in the page table entry, rather than just simply the physical address, there is going to be some more bits of information. And when you bring in the whole page table entry into the TLB, it's going to be the physical address and some other bits. Okay? So, you know, the virtual memory is going to protect applications. So what you don't want to do is, you know, running different programs, different processes, and they are all sharing the same physical memory. What you don't want is one process to go and access data of the other process or, you know, read it or write it or whatever it is. You actually want to isolate those two. And, you know, these days also, you know, trying to, you know, protect from worms and, you know, stuff like that. So, viruses. Let me just briefly talk a little bit about, you know, one of the most canonical ways of introducing viruses into COVID has-been and how you provide protection against that using the virtual memory system. Okay? So, you know, a very common idiom for exploiting, for doing attacks as the following is, you know, there was a piece of code. If you have a piece of code, an application that is, you know, putting, you know, what functional, you know, function calling, you know, conventions and so on like that. You push the return address when you call a function. You push the return address in the stack, and then you pass parameter on the stack, read, you know, return values from the stack, et cetera, et cetera. Okay? So, you know, here is, you know, a function where, you know, it's pushing, you know, it's putting some data, say, a 128-character buffer, okay? And there's a return address. And the code is just simply putting the data up to 128 characters on the buffer until it sees an end of line, okay? All right? But it doesn't check to see that the input string that is getting passed is limited to 128 characters. Okay? So you can actually pass it a length unchecked, you know, a character string that is the attack code, and then basically, you know, a return address to that attack code. And so you wipe out the return address that you pushed when you call the function. So when this returns, you overwritten that return address with the address of the attack code, okay? And then you execute the attack code, the attacker gets to execute the attack code at the caller's privilege level, okay? So this was a very, very common way of, you know, introducing YSS and more. So again, you know, I have a stack. This is also called, you know, stack smashing attack. So my stack is theta. And what gets, what happens is the attacker pushes on your stack, succeeds in pushing on your stack the code to carry out the attack and overwrites this return address, so it jumps through and executes this attack code. So that brings in the notion of page level protection. So what you have now, here's my page table entry, you know, physical page number, a disk block, if the entry is valid, it has the physical page number or it has a dirty bit. And now it also has, so it's a valid bit, a dirty bit, physical page number, and also a set of permissions. So very early, not very early, you know, shortly after people decided to use virtual memory for protection, they said, hey, I could have permission bits with each page saying whether, you know, that page has read-only data or it has read-write data, and after these stack smashing attacks happen, Intel also introduced another permission bit saying, hey, can I, you know, the bytes, the bits on that page, can it actually be code that can be executed? Okay? And, you know, so when you go and try and do a instruction access, all right, do the translation, check the permission bits. If you do not have an execute permission and you are making an instruction access, that is a problem. You throw an exception, okay? Or you try and write into a page, you do a store, do a store does address translation, it checks to see whether it has the right permission. If so, it can do the store, otherwise it has an exception, okay? So, you know, for the stack smashing attack, you can set the stack permissions to be read-write and not execute. So if you are now trying to actually, the attacker is actually trying to execute this code, which is now in a page, which is on the stack, and that only has read-write permissions, it's not going to execute. So these permission bits are, you know, very, very widely used, and these permission bits migrate from the page table, they're in the page table, they migrate along with the physical page number into the TLBs, so every access you make, you also check the permissions to see whether you can carry out that operation correctly. The stack area is executed. How do recursive functions work in the stack area? You should, the recursive function, any function, what it's putting on the stack is its correct text, yeah. And that is the return address, you know, any register values you're saving, you know, the return values, maybe, that are getting passed, and you know, the calls, the parameters that you have put in there, et cetera, you're never putting code. The code is sitting off in some other page. The stack pages, those are data pages. They're sitting elsewhere. You should never be executing stuff from them. Well, in the good old days, in the good old days, the other thing you should never be doing is you should be never writing into code. In the good old days, actually, you could actually write into the code as it was executing to create new code. They gave people many opportunities to show how smart they were. I read an account from the 60s. They were on this terrible little mainframe, and someone had wrote a card program in, and he didn't figure out how it worked until 10 years later. It was incrementing the instruction field of a particular opcode and the next opcode. It completely changed the flow. When we were talking about the instruction set in the early lectures, we talked about if you have unused bits, make sure they are zero. The reason for that is, again, the unused bits over there, people were smart enough to store a six-bit constant. Now, when you use that unused bits for a new instruction, then your code broke because it was an instruction, not a six-bit constant or whatever. Six bits was expensive at that time. With the System 370, were they advanced enough? Were the people then advanced enough to have all these concepts? Do you remember if they didn't have the hardware support? The virtual memory was first done in 370. Absolutely. I forget which model number. It was in the 60s. You know, humans have been smart always. One of the other things that you see a lot is we talked a little bit last time about computing and memory. We'll talk a little bit about SIMD instructions in the next unit. We'll get to vectors, okay? We'll talk a little bit about the memory. We'll talk a little bit about SIMD instructions in the next unit. We'll get to vectors, okay? These are all concepts that people built with big machines. One of the first machines that did these big-level, massively parallel big-level operations for images was built by you'll never guess what company built it. If you watch TV, you've seen ads of the Goodyear Blue. Goodyear, Goodyear. It's a dire company. So, Starin was built by Goodyear, a dire company. Everyone was building to do image processing. Some of those same ideas. You know, forgotten. When you start doing these when it was done in the 60s, 70s, okay? And very high-end, okay? But then, in the 90s, we'll talk a little bit about these people figured out, hey, what I have in my computing is not only character but, you know, it started out with integers and floating points, right? I can do some business stuff with it, okay? So, like, characters and all the other stuff. And then, people start saying, hey, maybe we can do a little audio stuff. Video stuff. Okay? And then those all become, you know, audio characters of, you know, video pixels and, you know, they're different. They're black and white in different colors and lots of processing. And so, you know, you start doing that as your new applications come. But many a time, you know, some of the concepts are developed from the high end, and then the low end borders, or the mid end borders from the high end, they all float around. And then what happens is that because the volumes at the lower ends are so much more, so much more, you can actually advertise. Okay, so that's all I want to talk about, you know, what your memory at this point and memory. Anybody have any questions about this stuff? It's actually, you know, so, getting back a little bit to the TLBs. So we talked about TLBs and you know, hey, 64, whatever it is, this TLB is good, et cetera, et cetera. And things are working fine, you know, desktops work fine. But then all of these other applications come around like instant time application. Social media. Okay. Where you just have enormous amounts of data and you just go through a pointer from here to there, whatever it is. Okay. We'll get to that a little bit when we talk about multi-threading too. Okay. And you know, huge data sets and then they are just, they start, you know, you need bigger and bigger TLBs and people then even talk about bigger and bigger pages for those applications. But, you know, that's one of the reasons why you have these humongous, you know, like, you know, 3K, 2K, 3K, 4K, second level TLBs. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. The question is, if I have a virtually indexed, physically tagged cache, does it also have a synonym problem? This is the physical index and the virtual index equivalent, so you've done nothing. It's just physically indexed, physically tagged. So a physically indexed, physically tagged cache doesn't have a synonym problem. Because there's only one. Okay. A virtually indexed, virtually tagged cache has a synonym problem because same virtual address would be in the same place. A virtually indexed, physically tagged cache, what you're doing is you're using virtually, virtual address bits to index into the cache. But those virtual address bits, because they are fully contained with the page offset, are going to be the same as the physical. The index will be the same. The tag will be different. The tag, the tag, okay. The tag is the tag that you have. So the index is what you need to start the read of the cache. Alright? The index is what you need to do to start the read of the cache. The tag is what you need to determine if it's going to be a hit or a not. The tag is going to be completely physical the address. Okay? So, so what's happening is now you're reading the TLB, getting the physical address, that is what you're using to compare against the tag. Make sense? And that is what I said over here to this page coloring. Okay? I know that the page offset bits are not changing. And I'm maintaining this okay? What I'm trying to see is can I have more bits that I can use to index that aren't going to change as part of the translation? And that's what I'm doing with this page coloring over here. Saying that, hey, you know, I preserved the bottom two bits of the virtual page number and it's going to have the same physical page number. But the tags are fully physically addressed. So we should just call this index and physically tagged. It's not really virtually indexed. No. It is. It is. It is a virtually index physically tagged. Right, but the index is identical whether or both physical and physical. So I know you brought this up. How do these Qualcomm things do it then? We don't know. But they can't be doing this because they don't have enough bits. No, they don't. So what they do is they actually this unless they do this with some remapping. I do not know that. Okay? But more likely I've seen in the past for many years is they have a small micro TLB. They call it a nano TLB. And then they can also access this normal TLB in parallel. But it may take, okay, so what I'm doing is say I'm accessing this nano TLB in half a clock cycle or something. At the same time I'm accessing the 128 entry level one TLB. Maybe it's taking two side cycles. So I'm still in a sense overlapping I'm not letting the TLB access necessarily if I get a somewhat hit in the micro TLB and get in the way. If I don't then perhaps I'm only paying an additional extra for doing the re whatever it is. Okay? So they, many of the arm designs have these micro or nano TLBs as they call them. So if you don't have enough bits to do the virtual, the VI's don't equal the PI's, then you really need to have some kind of physical indexing or you're going to have a synaptic problem. Yes. And unless you control your own software in which you do something like this then you call that a bad design and you're going to regret it in a few years. Guaranteed. I don't know if you'll allow or not but confused anything. I'll accept. It hardly changes. You'll regret it. You know. So you just blabber in this office. Okay. So I only have a couple of minutes left but what I do want to introduce to you is the next which is data level travels. And we'll see this in great detail next time. So we'll talk a little bit about vector processors and of course we won't talk about the multi-processor details. That's 757 and a little bit about thread level next time. So you know the metrics we've done is like you can see it's time taken to perform a single task. Very hard to make smaller. Bandwidth is the number of tasks that can be performed in a given amount of time. It's easier to make larger because you can overlap the tasks and execute them in parallel. And we saw one form of parallelism. Instruction level parallelism. We saw pipelining. We saw superscalar. And we saw that IAP is out there and that's what's keeping processors going today. Compiler process that has to do a fair amount of work to do it. But yeah, you know, okay. It's fine. And you know then we saw the clocked IPC at our odds. Pipelining fast clock, hazards in IPC. Wide issue increases IPC, higher IPC but then you have bypassing slow clock. And can we get in a sense the best of both? And you can do that if you have a workload environment where you are doing the same computation on lots and lots and lots of data. Okay? And we will see that how we exploit the vectors. And you know, and it's data vectors started out for scientific computing. And then, you know, then there was interest again in the vector principles once we started working with sound and video which are again, you know, you're doing the same computation on different data items in a very regular fashion. And then these days matrix multiplication seems to be what you're doing all the time with GPUs. For AI, again, very regular computation. Same computation on lots and lots of data. We'll see how these vector principles can really help in this situation. Okay, so we'll see you on Friday then. And you know, I'll be...
