Title: 752_Lec15
Source file: 752_Lec15.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

...projectors. I remember, you know, we were cleaning up the office building and there was this old in-focus projector which we would all share and I remember we paid $8,000 for it at that time. You know, and now I don't know how much you can get for it. Okay, so for today's office hour, I will be leaving a little early if you show up. Okay, so any questions? In regards to the exam, just because sometimes this is not fully obvious, should we always assume the leftmost register is the destination if it's in the free operand form or the rightmost register? Oh, I mean, that would be, you would be told that, right? You shouldn't, no? Okay, typically the right is the destination. Okay. So the other two are so when we get too long, you can, but that's not for a while. So whenever you basically have to clear out all the operations, which have, you know, okay, so where we left off last time was an opportunistic memory scheduling and then, you know, so these days what you actually do is you actually use techniques to predict. So let me sketch that piece up again. So we had storm A, load B, load C, load D, load D, something like this. Okay, so you know, what you would like to do is you would like to have these loads, you know, all the loads try and execute before prior storm between, with unknown addresses. So you can allow this speculative execution where if the load actually executes, so this could execute before A, B could execute before C and before A and then you detect a misspeculation and you recover from that misspeculation. Okay, but then you can go further and actually do a prediction on whether a load is going to be dependent on the previous store. Okay, so you know, if this load, you know, is not, doesn't misspeculate, if it's not dependent on a previous store, it's going to misspeculate. Okay, so take a look at this load B. If this load is executed before stores A and B and there's a misspeculation, then what you can, then that's an exact instance of where this load was dependent on the previous store. Okay, so you can actually develop a predictor, just like the rank predictor, okay, as to whether this load is going to misspeculate or not and if the load is going to misspeculate, just do not execute the load before a prior store. Okay, so that was some of the early store-planned prediction and so if this load, you know, misspeculated with A, all right, and because it was having the same address, then you just don't let this load execute before any previous store even before the store to see. And one other complication that happens then is again, you know, you need to know these addresses so that, you know, the load can wait a long time for all these addresses to be known, especially if you have only one store queue and not the separate load address and load data queues where you actually execute the store when both the address and data are known. Okay, so what you can further do, and this is what, you know, pretty much everyone does these days, is you can predict the load store pair and wait only for that one store to execute. Okay, so if this load happened to misspeculate with the store A, okay, then I'm going to predict that, I'll learn, of course, it'll maybe take me a couple of tries, a few bits to implement this way, that way, to make that prediction that this load is now dependent on this store. Okay, so I have to only wait for this store's address, this store to execute, to be able to execute this load. This load could execute before this store, for example. Okay, so the predictors that I use with just for every process of these days, they have these load store pair predictors where they wait for only one store to execute, and the other loads, this load is going to wait for this store, and, you know, the other loads can go ahead and execute at any time, and this load now, when the store executes, this loading gets woken up, and it can execute before I misspeculate. Okay, it actually turns out, you know, these predictors are very highly accurate, you know, whether an excess of 99 percent you can get them, because the patterns of loads and stores are such that, hey, a load is writing something, a store is writing something to memory, and the load is reading from that memory location, those dependence relationships are quite stable, and I showed you the example of the calls, you know, what happens on a call, you're passing parameters, and then you're pushing them on a stack, those are stores, and then you're reading parameters of the stack, those are the loads, so those, you know, those load store relationships are very, very stable. Okay, quick question, John. So the predictor then for that is essentially you can track to the PC or where the store was, is that, and the PC of the load, and the PC of the store. Okay, I know that more than the POKE-2. Yeah, no, I mean the APPL process was that 4K in these, so POKE entries go with the PC of the store and the PC of the load, so yeah. I remember that, I forget if it was a meltdown or specter that had to do with like predicting loads. Oh, oh, say that again. Meltdown or specter, the vulnerability that do with predicting loads or rather how loads were in order, you can tell it based on caches. So, okay, the specter and meltdown were, here's what they were, here's what they were exploiting. So, you know, timing hits and misses was sort of vulnerability known for a long time, okay. But what they were exploiting is that, hey, you know, you're actually executing loads speculatively, which have side effects of bringing something into the cache, which is what they were exploiting to actually extract the bits, the keys, okay. And once that vulnerability came around, then they're like, oh, and behold, you know, step back and see, you know, what is sort of the vulnerabilities that are being, what is the so-called vulnerabilities that are being exploited. It is that your execution is making some change to some state that is not visible architecturally, but it's there. And knowing that's what the execution is doing, you can go and try and maybe create, you know, some conflict or whatever it is in that state that is not visible and figure out what may be going on, okay. So, they, initially, they just exploited the, you know, raw control speculation. And then they realized, hey, there are lots of other forms of speculation going on in Processor. So, the academics, one after the other, hey, I can exploit it this way, I can exploit it this way, I can exploit it this way, makes good papers, it makes good PR, whether it is relevant in the real world or not, you know. And the way I like to put a lot, and so, you know, to exploit those vulnerabilities, the attacker and the attackee have to coexist in the same piece of hardware at about the same time, okay. And the easy way to do it is to solve it is to not let that happen, you know. So, it's like, hey, you know, you're in your house, if you invite random people into your house, then you better make sure your stuff is locked up, okay. If you don't invite people into your house, then you don't have to leave your stuff locked up. Yeah, so, you know, there are also some different speculations, people try to exploit, I can do this, but, you know, whatever goes on. I don't think I have been doing successful attacks that are done, so. But then they did the company and the OS people did get a new patch which reduced performance. Yeah, because initially, it's the, you know, once something's out there, the press is saying, hey, you have a problem, they have a problem, and stock price is going down, then you basically say, hey, we have a solution, and then once you're out of the press, then you just go back to, you know, like doing things how they are. They should be, so. If, like, if the problem is so specific and so niche that targeting it becomes much more an academic venture rather than an actual perspective, then why even bother with it? And most people don't. You just think, okay, you guys did. Yeah, I mean, you know, security is a different issue altogether. It's like, you know, there have been all sorts of, you know, exploits that people have. I mean, you know, people talk about the speculative execution attacks as to, you know, listening to what keystrokes you're typing in, monitoring the radiation from stuff that is going on. Many other things you can do. Anyway, that's a completely separate subject over there. One thing I do want to, you know, point out is, you know, we talk about, we talk about, hey, the wider you go, that, you know, the more complicated it is to have a faster talk speed, if you will. Okay. And so, you know, how does this frequency versus trade-off work? Okay. So in the front end of the pipeline, where, which is not bothered by dependencies between instructions, okay, you actually try and do wide and wide, or you have to do wide and wide, okay. In the back end of the pipeline, you try and have, you know, as fast a block as you can because it's the, you know, some, you know, the dependency is going to take two cycles to execute because one instruction depends on the other, then your cycles better be fast. Okay. And in a sense, how do you achieve that? The way, you know, if you take a look at, you know, the front end part of the pipeline, okay, you go and do, you know, the front end part of the pipeline, you go wide, as wide as you can. Once you get to the back end, you basically can do stuff in parallel. Okay. And you can then, you know, you know, so these independent things, they can be running in parallel, so you actually can add, you know, faster blocks, portals in the back end. So, you know, your designs, like, I don't know, you can't necessarily find out what, you know, some of the newer processors are doing, but they're using different frequencies in the back end, but at least, you know, in the income machines, they did talk about that they would run the in-order stages at one frequency, and then the out-of-orders stages at even a double frequency. One thing, that issue that does come up, is a problem. So you've seen how we go about building one of these, you know, out-of-order processor precise interrupts. There's a lot of searching, you know, you know, cam searches, matches, SRAMs, okay, so they consume a lot of power, okay. You have, you know, SRAMs all over the place, cams all over the place, and so the question comes as, you know, is the out-of-order a low power technique? No, it's not necessarily a low power technique by any means. However, however, okay, the more important question is, is it a low energy technique? You know, if you are, if you are energy limited in a battery device, upper device, a low energy technique, and it actually could be because the out-of-order execution will let you get done faster. And then the question is, hey, do you actually have other components that you can put in deep sleep modes? And we'll see a little bit when we talk about caches to actually cut down on the power consumption when those pieces of hardware are sitting idle. We'll talk a little bit about that. Okay, and so it seems to be the case because every mobile device, you know, every smartphone these days has processes that do out-of-order execution. I won't talk about this, so, okay, these summary slides you can read. I guess I don't need to go through those. You can just read these. Questions about the out-of-order execution? So you take, you know, you take a look at the processor that I gave you the slides for, okay, that I just pulled from Harsha Flash here, the Volcom and the, you know, one from Ampere and another one from AMD. Pretty much the stuff that you have learned, and that's what they have. They have a lot of it. You mix, they can kind of mix, you know, different techniques in different places, and this stuff is still very wide. This is what's defining all the processes. Maybe someday some clever person will come up with a different model, but up until that point, this is what's going to be there. Okay, so now I want to move a little bit into storage hierarchies. We'll talk about caches for a few lectures, and then we'll talk about, you know, some of the memory stuff, and you've all seen caches before, but, you know, we will actually, we'll review some of that stuff, but mainly we'll spend a fair amount of time on high performance cache techniques. Okay, what are the different tricks we can play to get high performance cache techniques, maybe some low power techniques to what we can do, since the cache is the biggest consumer of power and energy. I'm going to check what we can do to try and save some of that. Okay, so, you know, memory hierarchies have been done right from the first day of the year. So, you know, this was from the paper that described the first computer is, you know, ideally we'd have an infinitely large memory capacity such that any particular word could be immediately available. We are forced to recognize the possibility of constructing a hierarchy of memories, each of which has greater capacity than the preceding, but which is less quickly accessible. Okay, so this was before you even had semiconductors or anything like that. Okay, that was very well known even then. Okay, so these days, you know, the hierarchies are much, much more important. If you have a 3 gigahertz processor and you can do an add in, you know, a third of a nanosecond, the main memory latency, say, is 50 to 100 nanoseconds. In a night implementation, if you're just reading data from DRAM, you're going to basically be 300 times slower, so every load operation that you're going to do is going to take 300 cycles. The CPF load is going to be 300. Everything else is not going to matter. Interestingly, you know, when the first microprocessor I was working with, it lowered, they had a wait state, a single cycle to get 11 cycles. Accessing memory took only one cycle. Okay, so what you cannot achieve is memory that operates at processor speeds, memory as large as need for all running programs, and memory that's cost effective. You cannot achieve all three at the same time. So you have hierarchies and, you know, what are the different components you can have? You can have static RAM, which is typically going to be built with your standard processor on your processor logic, semiconductor technology, processor semiconductor technology. And typically it's taking six transistors to store one bit. It's going to be optimized for speed first and then density, and it's going to be fast and the speed is proportional to its area. Dynamic RAM is going to be optimized for density, so you take the minimum amount of hardware to store a single bit, and that's typically going to be one transistor plus one capacitor. And it's going to be slow because the internal access to this is slow, okay, but then also you have to move it in and out of the chip and that transfer across the pins of that chip to the processor is also take some time. Okay, and what people have tried to do is they've tried to, and this is a completely different fabrication technology. The number of the steps you do are different and it doesn't mix well with this logic. From time to time people have talked about, hey, can we have D-RAM and processor logic technology and, you know, they come out with something D-D-RAM, whatever it is, it generally doesn't quite necessarily work out. Now there has been talk and there are actually products which actually say can we do the opposite, and we see one of those a little bit, okay, is can we actually put processing in this D-RAM technology. The processing that you could do would be very rudimentary, simple stuff, nothing like the complex logic that we built in the last unit. Then there is also a whole bunch of non-volatile storage. So these are all electronic, so the power goes away, it's gone, okay, but to be able to store data even when the power is off, you need non-volatile storage and that has typically been magnetic disk and, you know, the last few years it's also been flash RAM, but, you know, yeah, these are sort of the two technologies that this is electronic, but it retains the data when the power goes off. Okay, so it all comes down to, you know, how can I achieve my performance objective and goal within my cost. So first let us take a look at the cost differential of those different memory technologies. So these days with a hundred dollars, maybe I could get 16 megabytes of RAM, four gigabytes of D-RAM, and a terabyte of disk. Okay, so a factor of 250 difference between the different technologies. What is the latency? You know, the latency to access SRAM typically is going to be less, you know, less than a nanosecond or few nanoseconds of the order of maybe, you know, one, two, four, eight, ten clock cycles, depending upon, you know, the speed that I have built the RAM. Okay, so maybe I'll have, I'll use, you know, SRAM with a certain speed to build my level one cache that's going to take maybe three clock cycles. But a different one for a different speed for level two cache and a different speed for level three cache that's going to level three cache maybe take, you know, 20 clock cycle, 30, 40 clock cycles, but whatever. Okay, D-RAM is 100x more slower than that and disk is, you know, several orders of magnitude even slower than that. Okay, as concerns how much data, what is the bandwidth you can get from the SRAM? You can get, you know, tens of gigabytes per second because everything's on chip and fast access. It just depends on what the clock cycle is and how wide you are. D-RAM is, you know, much slower than that and disk is even much slower than that. Okay, and the clash, you know, is sort of another side. But this is a little data graph, but what it shows you is, you know, the rate of change in speed, the cost and the access time for SRAM, D-RAM and disk. Okay, so the cost of SRAM has been going down, but the speed has also been going down because this is a logic technology. That's what made our transistors faster and, you know, allowed the processor to have faster clock. D-RAM, the cost for it has been going down significantly, okay, but the speed has been, not been going down at the same rate, and for disk, you know, the cost for bet has dropped dramatically, but the speed, because it's a mechanical device, you know, okay, you went from spinning at, you know, 3600 RPM to 1700 RPM or whatever it is, okay, you're only accessing, you're increasing the speed by a factor of two. And then what that results in, if you can see these different slopes, this is sort of tracking more the process of technology slope, which is the clock side speed. So the performance difference is that the processors, you know, are getting much faster because the clock speed has increased and the IPC has increased and the memory at a much lower rate. And what this means now, the gap is previously, hey, it only took one cycle to get to memory, okay, now it's taken. These days, you know, 300 cycles or something like that to get to memory. Okay, so what we're going to do is we are going to exploit locality. You have seen this before, okay, locality of memory references and it is property of just what every program has, locality of the program with very few exceptions. And why is that, you know, just let's talk through some of the, you know, why locality exists because this will become important as we try and exploit, you know, come up with more level caching techniques to go back to, hey, you know, why this works or doesn't work, okay. So instructions, okay, instructions repeatedly, typically I'm going to be accessing a similar set of instructions, okay, the same instructions again and again. Okay, so if I don't execute the same instructions again and again, then either my program runs and is done very quickly, I don't have any instructions to execute, or I have a huge program where the instructions are not executed, you know, repeatedly executed. Okay, well typically you don't have a huge program that you repeatedly don't execute the instructions. So there ends up being locality where I'm like doing the same thing instructions, you know, at least in your temporal windows repeatedly. And so, you know, just like, you know, you go to, if you take a look at the, you want something from UW Madison Library, they likely show up there, hey, but, you know, it may be on, when you go to the library, the shelves are easily accessible, it may be somewhere back in the stacks, but I think these days may actually be in Verona, or, you know, somewhere else, okay, that there's a rain on a space over here, so that's where your disk is effectively. If I ever need to go to disk, then, you know, I'll get it from desk, but it'll take much longer. Okay, what about data accesses? You know, why is there locality in some data accesses? Okay, so, well, one of the biggest sources of locality is, hey, you know, we are writing, we are telling people, write stuff with functions, then, you know, small functions, etc., and you have these stack frames where you put stuff on, etc. So you're repeatedly making access to the top of the stack, which is a very small area, okay, the repeated locality is there. Okay, you know, I say I'm walking through some, you know, structure, you know, big database of some kind, okay, I, you know, chasing some list, and I go and get to some record in the list, and what, you know, I'm repeatedly accessing the fields of the structure, as you will, not repeatedly, I'm accessing different fields of structure, that also is sort of the locality, hey, once I get to this data point, this address, I'm going to be accessing the other addresses. Okay, you know, just the way you, the right programs, you end up having locality. Now, is it possible that you can write programs that don't have a lot of locality of memory references? Yes, you can. Most programs will be naturally written, end up having locality of reference. So, there is the notion of temporal locality, where recently referenced data or instructions is likely to be referenced again soon, and if you, to exploit temporal locality, what you want to do is you want to cache that recently used data in small, fast memory. Okay, a spatial locality suggests that, hey, you know, if I reference some data item, then I'm very likely to reference other data items that are nearby memory addresses. Okay, so then what I want to do is, I want to try and break my memory addresses and proactively fetch other memory addresses that are close by. Okay, so I'm going to fetch data in large chunks to also include nearby data at nearby memory addresses. And that solves, you know, room for data instructions. Of course, I could write a program when it doesn't, but generally it does. So, what you end up doing is you have a hierarchy of memory components. The upper components are the ones that are closer to the CPU. Sometimes people draw this picture upside down, and then it's the lower components, but you know, you know, the lower components are closer to the CPU, but that's just sort of a semantic thing. So, we have the components that are closer to the CPU are fast, they are small, but they're, and they're expensive. Okay, the lower components you can have big and cheap, and therefore they must be small. And these components, you're also going to connect by sets of wires, which are buses. There is also a latency and bandwidth issues of these sets of wires. What we would like to do is try and keep the most frequently accessed data in the uppermost component of the hierarchy, and then move data from the next level up as it is needed, and move data that I don't need in the faster component down to the slower component. The objective is to minimize the latency of access of the memory, and the latency of access is going to be the latency of finding something in the component, which is the hit, latency of the hit, plus the percentage of references that actually best here times the latency that it would take to service that missed request. Okay, so if we want to now objective to reduce this overall, to optimize the average access time, we're going to want to not do just one of these, we're going to want to try and do all of them roughly at the same time. Sometimes they, you know, go against each other, but we want to try and improve all of them. Okay, you mean the hit rate of all the caches, the layers of the cache? I want, no, I want to improve the latency of the hit, wherever the hit is. I see the three turns. Plus the percentage of misses, plus the latency of the miss. Okay, yeah. Yes, we will. That's, we're going to do that in the next couple of lectures in in gory detail. We'll do that. Okay, so all right. So here is a sort of a concrete memory hierarchy. Here's the CPU and the first level are primary caches and typically these days I would have separate instruction and data caches. Why so? Because we have pipeline processors and every cycle I'm doing a fetch and I have to be able to also do data accesses. Right now I'm going to have that structural hazard conflict and you know things break down and these are typically 8 to 64 kilobytes each. People are trying to build bigger and bigger instruction caches so you know they have the processor I showed you have 192 kilobytes which is three times 64 and we'll talk about that a little bit later on. But you know you aren't going to get that much larger and still be fast. Then these days typically on a chip you also have a level two or even a level three cache. Okay, this is also made out of SRAM. Okay, just like the level one caches are primary cache are made out of SRAM but these are slower SRAM as you will and they are much larger and they take up more area of course. These days you also have typically a level three on chip. Then there is the main memory which is going to be made up of SRAM and you know for your typical pc that's 4 to 16 gigabytes. You have servers that have many hundreds of gigabytes or you know even terabytes. So yeah and then the fourth desk is you know fourth level is desk. Now the movement of data between the primary caches and the CPU that's loads and stores. That's what's doing okay and that movement has been created or managed or even orchestrated by the compiler. The compiler that's saying hey move this data from this memory location which is in the cache and moving the cache to the rest. Movement between the main memory to the L2 from the L2 to the L1 and reverse is what's going to be managed by hardware. Okay and the movement between the main memory and desk is managed by the operating system. We are mostly going to be concerned about these you know the organizations of these caches in this part and then you know how we manage them hardware. When we talk about memory you talk a little bit about you know dmbs and page tables and so on. For this unit we are mainly going to be dealing with this part and we will start off by talking about the ABCs of cache organization. Then we move on to classifying different misses to figure out how we're going to get improvement. We're going to first have to understand what's causing the misses, why are the misses happening and then we can figure out how to come up with techniques to attack those misses. We'll come up with high performance techniques to go after the three components. Okay miss rate, miss latency, hit latency. Okay so we'll talk about reducing misses, improving miss penalty and improving hit latency. And then we'll also talk about some low power techniques because again because the you know caches are taken up a lot of the area a lot of the transistors so savings and power for when you have so many transistors adds up quite a bit. And then next lecture unit nine we'll take a look at this part. Any questions so far? So let's start off with a basic cache memory array structure and you know stuff that you've seen before but we you know go through it and then to understand hey what is it we're going to have to do. So basically any memory is organized as an array where you have some number of entries in the array and each entry has some number of bits in it. So here I have a array which has 1k entries each entry has 256 bits in it. And the way I will read something from this memory I will give it an address and that address is going to select one entry over here okay. So I have 1k entries that is two to the tenth so I have 10 bits of address. So these 10 bits of address go to a decoder and the decoder is so these are what are called words okay and the decoder is going to select one of these word lines and then the entire set of bits in that entry is going to be read out on different bit lines 256 in this case and from there it'll go on to some multiplexer and sense and multiplexer and so on like that. Okay so data travels on the bit lines here we have you know 32 bytes. Now this is a picture that you will see logically okay in reality that's not what it is. What we do is that you know 1k entries really you break it down and try and arrange it so that you have a physical layout is roughly square okay and you do that to basically rather than having you know big you know lines going over here you try and have a do a vertical partitioning to minimize the violence over here. Okay so what I've done now is here I've taken that you know I've taken that you know 1k array and broken it down to 256 here and then 256 here 256 here 256 here and now what I will do is you know I will instead of having one bit big decoder I'll have four separate decoders. Okay and then first using the upper two bits of the address I will select one of these sub arrays and then for each sub array I can give the other 10 bits remaining 8 bits or 10 bits of address. Okay nothing says that I have to do this only once. I can further take this 256 and make it into four sub parts of 64 each. Okay so I can recursively apply this recursively so that will minimize the over wire length so each node in a sense if you take a look at it physically looks more like an edge and so when you actually now go and take a look at a die plot of a array of cache of memory so those things are easy to see over here. You know these arrays are divided up into chunks if you will and you know roughly square you know roughly square. This is hey I couldn't quite get it to be roughly square but whatever oh you know I had this much stuff left out and that's what I did. Why so much space between those squares? Why do we actually get to see that? Why do you actually get to see this and not this? No no no in like in the lower right corner you get this cache right you get you're showing these H blocks or whatever right but why why are there these big yeah those lanes there what's going on there I think those are just basically the wires just getting the wires of the decoders now those are probably the big lines those may be the multiplexers and the you know decoder multiplexer sentence okay okay all right so now let's talk about a basic basic cache structure so say I have a 32 kilobyte cache and this 32 kilobyte cache has 1k frames and 32 byte blocks if you will okay so I have 1k and what is a frame? A frame is a place in the cache where the block is going to be sitting so I have you know like this 1k array over here and now you know so I'm going to access I have an address and using this address I'm going to go and get a particular block from this cache okay and in a sense I'm doing some sort of a very simple hash table over here so I have my 32 bit address over here some number of bits of the address depending on the block size and this is the byte address okay is going to determine which byte in a block that I'm going to beat okay and then some number of bits of the address are going to be presented to this address decoder to select one of the frames of the cache and that's going to be the index into that those are going to be considered the index bits of the address okay so the low five bits are what I call the byte offset bits the bits that I use to select one of the 10 bits that I use to select one of these 1k frames is going to be called the index bits okay and typically what I do is after I lock off the byte the block offset bits the next set of bits is the bits that I'm going to use to index over here nothing says that these are the bits that I have to use the these bits could be some other sets of bits okay instead of it being bits 5 through 14 they could be 6 through 15 or 7 through 16 or they could be 5 through 9 and then 11 through whatever okay there could be any bits of the address and why do you use these bits spatial locality right because hey you know so these are the bits that are going in these address are going to correspond to consecutive memory addresses and you know you're likely to access consecutive memory addresses and then if you want to not only bring those in but you also want to make sure they can collectively reside in the cache at the same time okay so you know if I chose some other sets of bits it may be the case that two consecutive blocks may not be able to reside in the cache at the same time because they conflict okay so these work best but again I point out nothing says the index must be these bits okay later on when we talk about one of the more cache optimization tricks what we will do is we use these bits and XOR them with some other bits to figure out the index all right okay so now if I have a this cache this cache is 32 kilobytes of cache okay I can only hold and I have four gigabytes of memory I could access with 32 bits only 32 kilobytes of that memory could be in the cache at any given time so which one of the memory blocks of the entire memory are actually present and that's what I have tags for okay so so 32 bit address five bits are there for block offset and for the index that's 15 down that's 17 bits left over and all the blocks that have the same you know the same index pattern are going to be in the same frame over here and and for the same set of index bits I could have two to the 17 different sets of bits over here right that's 17 this is two to the 17 different value okay so I could have two to the 17 blocks back onto that single frame and only one of them can be there and how do I know which one is there so what I do is I keep a tag with each block frame and I have a valid bit and now when I go and try and access this with address bits I go and select the appropriate frame read the data for that frame and read the tag for that frame check to see if the bit is valid compare my tag bits of the address which are these bits against the tag bits attached to that frame if they are the same I have a hit if I have a hit then I take my 32 bytes of data and if I want you know four bytes out of it I pull out the four bytes of it and that's how I get my data if this competitor over here says that this tag doesn't match the store tag over here then I have a miss then I have to go and press the block okay so you all seen this before but you know I wanted to review it again because once you start talking about times and so on then that becomes important okay first things first is let us try and see what the tag overhead is and again different techniques are going to have a different cost so we won't just keep in perspective you know all the different trade-offs that are over there that are happening so if I have a 32 kilobyte cache means the cache over 30 kilobytes of data that's what's called the capacity of the cache that's how much data it can store the tag is considered overhead and let us see how much of a tag overhead we have in this cache over here in other words hey these are you know 250 so that's 32 bytes of data being stored here how many bits are being taken by the tags over here and that is the overhead so if I have 32 byte frames I have this five bit offset 10 bit index left with 17 tag bits so I have 17 tag bits here plus one and 256 bits over here so I have 17 tag bits plus one times how many frames I have you know 18 kilobits of tags or 2.2 kilobytes and 32 bytes kilobytes of data or in other words I have 18 bits of overhead for 256 bits of data that's got a six percent overhead what if I had 64 bit addresses if I had 64 bit addresses for the same situation what I would have is I would have five bits offset 10 bits index so 15 bits of these 64 bits are taken away I left it 49 bits for a tag and now the offset become the overhead becomes about 20 percent okay so 50 bits for 256 bits that starts at now all right so now what I'm going to do is I'm going to do a very simple cache simulation and the I go through this figure a little bit and then there will be multiple figures like this as we talk about the different cache organizations which I won't go through that much in detail okay so here is what I have is I have a cache that has eight entries in it okay so I just have eight entries and the entries are you know sorry okay I have it's a 32 byte cache and four white blocks so it has eight frames in it okay and so the frames are and so right so now the way I have so I have an eight bit address okay and so for the cache two bits are going to be and I have four white blocks two bits are going to be for the white in the block I have eight entries in the cache so I have index of three bits and then the tag is of three bits okay and this notation that I'm going to have these is a nibble notation so these are each of these is two bits okay so this is zero zero this is one one this is zero one this is zero zero okay so initially say that the cache and and so the and so the the the eight entries that the the eight index bits that I have over here they will be basically numbered so say that initially the cache content had it was in you know entry one it was this address and then an entry you know zero entry over here zero zero zero and I have for these three minutes zero zero one I have this and an address here etc okay in the cache that index so now I have this reference pattern okay so I sent to the cache address three zero two zero three zero two zero is going to map onto entry uh get this entry in the cache and it's going to then replace whatever was there would replace address zero zero two zero and I had a miss then I make a separate address three zero three zero to the cache it's going to map to entry zero three so zero three is this entry here and whatever was there it's going to replace and get a mess two one zero zero is going to go to entry one zero on the cache entry one zero in the cache is over this entry over here and replace this address over here get a mess zero zero one zero is going to entry zero one entry zero one what is there is zero zero one zero so I have a hit okay zero zero three zero is going to go to entry zero three entry zero three is this entry over here so the zero zero zero one zero two zero three one zero one and so you go there and previously had this but that got kicked out and got replaced by 3030 so you have a miss okay so let's try and classify the different misses that are happening because to be able to to be able to try and figure out how can i improve my catch i have to understand the misses not only the misses but what's causing the misses once i understand the cause of the misses then i can attack the different cause of the misses using different techniques so we are going to classify the misses into three c's you know former colleague just died a few years ago mark hill came up with this three c misclassification that you're going to classify you're doing a simulation like this and a miss happens you're going to classify a miss into either a compulsory miss a capacity miss or a conflict miss all right and what is a compulsory miss a compulsory miss is a miss that's going to happen for the very first time you access data means you start out the caches entry okay first time you access a data item it's going to miss in the cache so these compulsory misses basically are you know not misses that you can necessarily you know solve with by trying to change the cache organization except you will see we classify something made a little bit later on okay so you know you can play around with bricks in the cache and there's nothing you can be able to do about these compulsory you know the whole point of locality and so on and exporting locality is like you know if you have a program that's running for a long time that's what you want to make go fast if the program is you know comes and goes you know who cares whether you make it faster or not okay you want to make the program that's running a long time make it go fast and if it's running a long time it's going to be repeatedly executing the same set of instructions and working on the same data if you will okay so you know and so that data will be you know the overtime the compulsory message if you will will just become to be in the noise a capacity miss is a miss that is caused because of the finite capacity of the cache if you had an infinite cache you will not have any capacity misses and then the third type of conflict is i have a cache of a certain size okay but i have limited places in the cache where i can place a cache where i can place a block okay and the limitation is what is called the associativity of the cache okay and and so the conflict misses are the misses caused because i had a finite number of places in the cache where i can place a block so the if i had if i could place any arbitrary cache block any arbitrary block that apart from memory into any arbitrary cache block frame i would not have conflict so if i had a fully associated cache i would not have any conflict misses okay but these conflict misses are now what would be because i had a finite associativity all right so this model got extended to a fourth c which is actually additional misses caused by invalidation to enforce cache coherence later on and we briefly see this but it's more much more than any questions about compulsory capacity and conflict so you have some number of compulsory misses is positive some number of some number of misses you classify as capacity misses positive number some other number of misses i classify as conflict misses you know positive number except when it's negative we'll get that okay and what what does a negative conflict miss mean means that a a cache with a smaller associativity has fewer misses than a cache of a larger associativity right that's what it means seems counter-intuitive yeah a lot of stuff that's counter-intuitive that happens in real world we'll see this one later on what do you mean by okay all right so you know so the way this cache is going to work is index read a frame or if you have more associativity read multiple of them read all of them and then pull that data out of there and give it okay send it to the in a proper way if the data that you want doesn't end up in a cache line that is a misaligned access so you have to now make this access a second time all right here's what here's the whole cache line and here's a cache line and based on this address i'm pulling out whatever it is the address and i have a you know if you are making a misaligned access no no okay then i mean if the software basically saying they don't know i don't want to deal with the misaligned access and the hardware is dealing with misaligned accesses you have to then fetch the other cash mark now now you can appreciate the miss what the problem is like access colors and then pull out whatever the leftover data was in the second cash block and then and then and what you're saying is you know that doesn't mind you know i can do this i can do that you can access this hardware again a second time what's the so if the if the misaligned access misses then you have to do but the access to the second block misses then you have to do that etc yeah okay it's complicated but hopefully after hopefully where you are now in class after having seen the order execution scheduling and scheduling the depend bypassing and we saw in the you know in the commissal order algorithm how we can actually bypass we actually have to broadcast the tags before you actually do the access so you actually wake up and start the dependent instructions while you're accessing the cash before you even know there's a miss in the cash you can appreciate the complications that would happen if i actually hidden the cash but i have to make two cash accesses to pick in the cash because of the misaligned act i pay them the ms so you know and the it's not that the hardware couldn't do it you know and you have the hardware actually worked actually do the check and then make the thing so slow for the software doesn't ever do that again so do you have a question is it the case that you get that little uh the less than arrows there doesn't cash actually like pick out the bits or does it just send the whole cash line to the processor no no no so so so so what you do is if the cash reads the whole cash line this thing that i'm showing over here and so typically in this memory array you know you would read all the bits into you know how a multiplexer over here so this basically is then would be a multiplexer that is going to pull out the bytes that you are interested in and send them because the intro or the inter-cash lines are always doing everything in like the 64 byte we are reading the whole cache but yeah but it doesn't send it does select correct and in fact later on what we will see one of the more interesting things we will see is that when we get talking to the non with what non-bottom caches we will see actually you could get another load to the same cash line okay and then you would service it from the buffer that brought in cash and in fact that's going to be one of the more complications of actually trying to get that to work correctly because if you just want to read it like oh yeah is that true in the instruction cache too i mean because we're trying to typically we're trying to get a bunch of instructions at one time right and so you know we're potentially in this cache we would be getting 32 bytes at a time do we send those off to the better i mean does the fetcher grab all those and wear a bunch of them okay okay okay for data we are reading cache line okay and say you access wonder you know four words you know four bytes in the then you from the data cache you send those four bytes the instruction cache you just dump the whole thing to the right okay and there because it's going to need these additional instructions rather than make those additional cash access or as we saw our white fetch we talked about white fetch okay so you're fetching the entire cache line or we try to you know document bottom view but you know we had the you know collapsing buffers whatever it is you actually had two cash lines and you know selected a large part portion of that from there and sent to the processor but you send many instructions in the process so you have to otherwise you aren't doing the end okay so given this now let us understand the abc's of caches okay you know abc's are associativity block size and capacity you know larger the capacity it decreases the capacity misses but an increase of the hit latency larger the associativity decreases conflict misses but it increases the hit latency why we see okay larger the block sizes larger block size for the same size cache you can have fewer blocks in it okay so since i have fewer frames i can also you know increase the conflict and capacity misses in capacity because i have smaller capacity by smaller not in total not in total bytes but in fewer frames and the fewer frames i can also get more conflict but a larger block size because of the spatial prefetching you know if i have blocks one two three four that i'm having misses on if i combine them into one big block i have a miss on block one but two three four will be hence okay so i can decrease the compulsory and capacity misses due to spatial retouching okay and typically it doesn't have an effect on hit latency because you know i just make my cache wider and reading the whole cache it may take a little more energy if that's not something to consider here but it may increase the miss latency why so we will see okay questions so the whole point of this is hey here's a bag of cricks you know we'll talk about some of the most people being used
