Title: 752_Lec10
Source file: 752_Lec10.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Further, you know, you know, life would be good if you could build a big, huge memory that was in pretty fast, but you can't do that, so you have memory hierarchies, and, you know, you're going to want to have a cache to access memory fast, okay, and if you don't find data in the cache, it's going to miss, because it misses all of a sudden now the load latency is not yet one or two cycles that you assume for the pipeline, it is something else. Okay, so the assumption of the software that the load latency was known and fixed is sort of gone. Okay, so what happens over there is then you basically have to stall everything, just like, you know, in a sense it's a simple one issue pipeline stall. It doesn't support caches very well. So this type has been used, actually, you know, I mean, you know, there are environments, microcontrollers, where you don't have any caches and so on like that, okay, you're just doing, you know, fixed computation, so, you know, in DSPs, you know, mortems and stuff like that, this kind of stuff is used. Okay, the, you know, a more realistic is to actually have the checks between the intergroups, so these stall cycles aren't scheduled by the pipeline, and so the pipeline depth and latencies are not fixed, they can be changed. Okay, and that also then allows you to support caches, you know, transmit, and this comes up from time to time, you know, Transmeta was a company that basically, what it did is it actually translated x86 code to these VLRW instructions dynamically, and with the intention I can have a, you know, and then they came up with this technique of dynamic compilation to use the technique of dynamic compilation, but, you know, I mean, eventually the other hardware caught up, and they also didn't quite do well, but, so, you know, what does VLRW actually bias, what makes the hardware simpler, okay, there is a simpler instruction cache, you know, branch prediction, no need for trace cache, simpler dependence check logic, because you really don't have any in some sense, okay, bypass paths are the same, clustering helps, you know, but it's not compatible across different machine bits, so you basically, you know, the question is, hey, is it worth non-compatibility, what's all these benefits necessary, and so the, you know, the Intel and HB were already sold on, mainly HB, we've got Josh Fisher and Barbara over there, okay, and trying to use this VLRW model for their future architecture, okay, so, you know, what they did is, and Intel being, you know, new software base, they say, you know, there has to be sort of a compatible path from one generation to the next, okay, so what they created was sort of a new VLRW, okay, but, you know, I mean, they changed, they said variable length instruction, whatever, okay, just some marketing BSR, explicitly parallel, so what, you know, what was done, you know, the thinking is, look, we can do a lot of stuff in software, which we will see what all we can do, tricks we can play, we don't want to do that in hardware, we'll see over the next several lectures what happens if we have to do it in hardware, the hardware required, okay, so, but we want to go from one generation to the next as hardware capabilities change without having to recompile, so we create an instruction set where it specifies a fair amount of parallelism, and you create the parallel, a parallel set of operations, if you will, but then dynamically you can actually do something else with it, if you will, okay, so they called it, you know, EPIC, explicitly parallel instruction set computing, so what you do is now you have 128-bit instructions over there, okay, and in those 128 bits, there are three different 41-bit instructions, okay, and so three 41-bit instruction, that's a hundred twenty three bits, the remaining five bits are left over for what is called a template, okay, and what the template does is that the template indicates, you know, what different types of instructions are the three, the combinations of those, okay, so, you know, you could have a instruction that has floating point or a memory or integer ALU, and what is the other one, you know, some, they had a couple of other types over there, okay, so you know, so you pack these instructions in a hundred, three of these instructions in a 128-bit wide instruction, and the template bit tells you what different types those three instructions are, okay, so why 41-bit instructions, hey, you know, in the MIPS and all we saw, we had 32-bit instructions, okay, so what are the additional nine bits in some sense being used for, okay, so in the MIPS, we had 32 registers, five bits to specify a register, they have 128 integer registers, why do they have so many, we will see when we start trying to get lots of parallelism, you need more registers somehow, okay, the more parallelism you have, the more instructions you have in flight, the results of the instruction have to go somewhere, okay, where are they going to go? They're going to go in a register, in the IA 64, in any statically scheduled, you actually have to go and specify the architectural register, when we talk about dynamic scheduling, we'll still need to have a register, but it'll be a physical register instead, okay, are you with me on this? We'll see that, okay, so they had 128 registers, okay, so now three, if you have three registers, that's 21 bits gone over there, okay, then they also have 64 predicate registers, and we'll see what predicate registers are, in other words, okay, so, you know, and you say, hey, you know, 41 bits is clue G, it's not a power of two, that's okay, because, you know, you never have only a single 41-bit instruction, you always have them in bundles of three, okay, and so, the, you know, compiler is going to discover as much parallelism as scan and hardware does the rest, and how the compiler, the techniques that it does to discover parallelism, we will see. So these templates, these five bits, like, you can't encode much, if you have three instructions, right, so they actually have different, several of the encodings talk about the different combinations, hey, you know, first is a memory, second is a memory, third is an integer instruction, that kind of stuff, and they had, and so they had, like, 32 different combinations that they could have of that, and was the compiler then limited to what it could, the way it could mix these three instructions? Yes, yes, okay, so, you know, we can build a huge, you know, do lots of instructions in parallel, build hardware to do that, but none of that is going to work out if there isn't enough parallelism in the program that you have to discover, okay, so how can the compiler help to extract the parallelism? We will talk about several techniques, these are applicable to any regular processor, but these are, you know, critical for the statically scheduled VRW epic process. So, you know, basically the principles of, hey, you have a program I need to try, and there is parallelism in the program, but it's hidden, how do I uncover the parallelism in the program, and, you know, we'll talk about several techniques, and those techniques, sorry, concepts, basic concepts, you know, and those concepts are going to be applied in different ways in either the static or dynamic rescheduled process. Okay, so let me take a very simple piece of code, what is called SACSP, single procession, AX plus Y, constant A, you know, vector X, vector Y, I'm carrying out this calculation, so A is going to be in register F0 outside this loop, and then I'm going to load X, you know, offset of R1 into F1, multiply F0 and F1, put it in F2, then load Y into F3, add F2 and F3, put it in F4, store F4 into Z, then increment the induction variable, compare it to C, check to see if I'm at the end of the loop, if not, I branch back to instruction 0. Okay, so if you now go ahead and take a single-issue five-stage pipeline and, you know, schedule this piece of code, how this piece of code flows through this pipeline, and I'm not going to go through this, you know, I mean, the first time around, you can figure out this fairly straightforward, where, you know, full bypassing, five cycles to do a floating point multiply, two cycles to do a floating point addition, and branch is predicted, taken, and memory operations take a single cycle, you will see that I have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, seven of these instructions in a steady state, if you will, take a look at, you know, execute, are going to execute in 11 cycles, so I'm going to get 0.64 IPC, and the utilization is going to be 64% of the machine. Okay? Now, let me do the same piece of code, but try and do two instructions at a time, and I'm going to do sort of a fluid schedule. Fluid means that I have this bundle of two, this bundle of two, then, you know, and then, you know, a instruction from a later bundle could execute an overlap with the previous bundle if you were bypassing, okay? So, again, you can take a look at, you know, figure out this schedule is fine, and so if you do this, you know, you will get the performance, I'm taking ten cycles to execute these seven instructions, okay? So now I get 0.7 IPC, however, the peak is two, so my utilization of the pipeline is only 35%, okay? What happened is that I had more hazards because I was trying to do more multiple things, and those hazards left to more stalls, and if I have to stall for one cycle, okay, that is two instruction opportunities, so each stall is more expensive, okay? So the, all right, so now let's just actually talk about, you know, a couple of things because these will come up repeatedly. Issue is the time at which an instruction begins execution, and the schedule is the order in which the instructions execute, okay? So what we want to do is if I'm doing N wide, I want to have an issue rate of N, and, you know, that's what I'd like to be able to do. Regarding the schedule, you know, if I have an in-order pipeline, the schedule and the stalls determine the time and instruction issues, very simply, okay? And a good schedule that minimizes stalls is important, both for performance and utilization. So a purely VLIW, a static schedule and static issue, so everything was determined statically, okay? Tainted VLIW, statics schedule, and pretty much dynamic issue, so I figured out the schedule of execution of instructions, but the time each instruction was issued was determined dynamically, partly. And in superscalar and epic, it's a static schedule, and the time at issue time is going to be fairly dynamic. Okay, so the idea that we've seen before is, look, if I have an instruction that depends on a previous instruction, what I want to do is I want to try and place instructions between the slow operations and the uses, okay? So what we need to do to schedule well is you need independent instructions, lots of independent instructions if you will, okay? And to get more independent instructions, I need to have a larger scheduling scope. What is the scheduling scope? The scheduling scope is the code region, the instructions that we have, that we are trying to schedule, okay? So the bigger the scheduling scope, the more instructions I have, the more independent instructions I have to choose from. Once the scope is defined, then you just figure out, you know, create the DAG of the instructions, okay? And then you just, you know, pick up instructions in the, you know, traverse the DAG in the order, and that determines your schedule. Fairly straightforward, okay? So now let's talk about a couple of compiler scheduling techniques, which are really techniques to enhance the scheduling scope. We'll start off with loop and rolling, which you likely have seen before, but it's a bread and butter technique, and then for more non-loop and roll floor trace scheduling, where a lot of interesting stuff comes in. And this is critical, you know, was critical for something like the Epic IA-64, and we will see that they had instructions to support what was needed for trace scheduling. Okay. Now, before we go to loop and rolling, when we get to the trace scheduling, we will see, okay, you know, hey, you know, this branch has a high probability of going in this one direction or the other, okay? Or, hey, this load is unlikely to be dependent on this store instruction, okay? How do I know that? How do I know that? Okay. And this all has, the compiler has to know that. How does the compiler know that? Okay. And what the compiler does not know, what the dynamic execution of the program is going to look like, which way the branches are going to go, okay? So what a typical technique that you do is you profile an execution of the program. You profile it, you know, with a set of inputs, and you actually carry out multiple profiles, okay? And then the assumption is that, hey, when you actually execute the program with a different set of inputs, the profile is going to look very similar to the profile over here, okay? So if branch A was taken 90% of the time with this set of inputs, with this set of inputs, maybe, you know, 90, 89, 91, whatever it is, similar, if you will, okay? So compilers, part of the reason, you know, I mean, so you can carry out, you collect information from previous runs of the program. And there's a lot of work that has gone on, and they realize that, hey, you know, instructions that miss in the cache, the same instruction is the one that repeatedly misses in the cache, okay? So given from a profile. Or, you know, if a load is dependent on a store, okay, in one run of the program, it's very likely the case in a different run of the program. A load is not dependent on a store in one run of the program, it's very likely not dependent on that store in a different run of the program, okay? So they carry out a lot of profiling techniques, and straight away, you're saying, you know, this is a lot of work that has been done before you even compile the program. You have to compile, run it, and then, you know, compile it again, okay? Branch outcomes tend not to be stable across inputs, okay? And the memory dependencies are stable, but we will see, exploiting this information, you still need a little hardware help. So this is a technique that is without profiling a lot of the software tricks that we're going to talk about just on board work, okay? It's an enabling technique. Now, in a sense, you know, what we are also doing when we talk about hardware techniques, what we did in the branch predictor, in a sense, we are doing a profile of execution of the same program, and then using it as the program executes, but we are doing it dynamically, okay? Okay, so why did I not get much performance in this XB? Okay, so this load took one cycle, multiply took five cycles, add took two cycles, store took one cycle, okay? So one cycle, and this instruction depends on this, so now, if I take a look at the chain of dependence of computation through this piece of code, it's going to take one cycle here, five cycles here, so six cycles, and then from here, I go to this add, which is going to take two cycles, so seven, eight cycles, and from there, I'm going to go to the store, it's going to take eight cycles, okay? So, you know, and then after that, you know, I can, in this add, so, you know, I'm going to have to expand at least those many cycles to execute one iteration of the loop. That's nothing I can do about it, okay? So the longest chain of instructions through one iteration of the loop is load to multiply, add, store, so that is nine cycles, okay? So if I only have these seven instructions, okay, and I'm trying to tolerate a latency of a nine cycle chain, I can't do that with only seven instructions. So how about I take two of these nine cycle chains and overlap them together, okay? Where do I get this other nine cycle chain? I get it from the next iteration of the loop, okay? So I'm going to unroll the loop, schedule two or more iterations together, and I'm going to get all the, take the instructions from two different iterations, fuse them together, fuse the iterations together, pipeline the schedule to reduce these stalls, and this pipeline schedule is going to introduce these right after read violations, and we're going to fix them by renaming registers, okay? Let's see how we do that, okay? So here is one iteration of the loop, here is the second instruction of the second iteration of the loop, okay? Now basically what I'm going to do is I'm just going to have one iteration, one big iteration that has instructions from two other iterations of the loop, okay? So the first thing that I need to do is, hey, this was the loop control instructions in the iteration, I only need one set of loop control instructions, okay? So what I've done is I'm going to fuse the induction variable and implement the branch, only have one of these, but now previously these were two implementing by four each, so that increments by eight, okay? And now this offset X from R1, this R1 was the, you know, this R1 was the R1 that I started out with over here, incremented by four, okay? And very similarly for this offset and this offset, so I'm going to add, I'm going to add four to these offsets over here, so I will get the correct offset of this R1, because I'm not changing this R1 over here, okay? All right? Got rid of that loop control, adjusted the implicit induction variable uses. And now what you do is you try and put some instructions between this load and this multiply and between this multiply and this add and between this add and this store, that's what we're going to try and do, okay? So you take the instructions that we had here and schedule them so that these instructions from the black iteration now get interspersed with the instructions, the second iteration get interspersed with the purple instructions from the blue instructions from the first iteration, okay? So far so good? So between this load and the multiply of the 1st iteration I put the load of the second iteration. Between the multiply and the add of the second iteration, I put the multiply of the, sorry, between the multiply and the add of the 1st iteration I put the multiply of the second iteration and and this second load of the second iteration, okay? Well, this code, if I just simply mix the instruction like this, is wrong. Okay? Why is it wrong? Why is it wrong? Because the load of the second iteration, the load of the first iteration is writing into F1, the load of the second iteration is writing into F1, and the multiply of the first iteration reads F1. If I move the load of the second iteration before this multiply, it's going to use the F1 from the second iteration, which is wrong. Okay? So what I want to do is I want to have the load in the second iteration write into a different register. So that register is going to be F5, and now this multiply of the second iteration uses as input the load from the second iteration F5 and writes into F6. The load of this load of the second iteration now writes into F7. This add of the second iteration writes into reads F6 and F7, which are the, you know, multiply and the load of the second iteration writes into F8. The store of the second iteration stores F8. Okay? So basically what I've done is I've renamed the registers of the instructions of the second iteration. And the way I've renamed them, I've renamed them statically by using different registers. Okay? The more the instructions now, previously I was getting by with F1, F2, F3, F4, four floating point registers, now I need eight of them. So the larger my scheduling scope, the more the registers I need, the larger the number of instructions I have in parallel, the more registers I need. The IA 64 was dependent solely on trying to do this stuff in statically in software. They were trying to create these scheduling scopes of several hundred instructions. You need 120 addresses. Any questions about this? Now if you go ahead and figure out the pipeline schedule for that with a single issue, you will see that, you know, you'll end up getting 12 instructions in 13 cycles. So you get this kind of IPC, fairly high utilization. Okay, so fairly significant speed up now in the single case. You can go ahead and draw this diagram over here, understand this diagram. The only thing I want to point out is, hey, this store is not, you know, this add is stalled in decode over here, and then it goes in, sorry, and this, and it's in execute over here. This execute does not propagate, the store from the execute store doesn't propagate over here, because this one's using the floating point addition pipeline. This one is using the integer execution. Yeah? How is it 13 cycles? It's more in it, so this, you know, if you, if you, it's not, it's not going to show up for the first iteration, if you will. Okay, but you can just take a look at the time between some instruction over here and the next iteration, if you will, you know, this it'll end up being like here. This is time, this is the time 13 cycle from here to here. Right? If I, you know, if I take a look at from the time the, you know, the first instruction completed until the same instruction the next iteration completed. Okay, okay. So one of the other things that is done, and I won't go too much into it, is the following. So say I have a piece of code that is x i equals to x i minus two star a plus y i or something like that, okay? Sort of loop over here, okay? Where what you're doing is you have a recurrence where in one iteration you're using the results of the previous iteration. Simple loop unrolling is not quite going to get you parallel execution over here. So what you can actually do is you can basically try and create a different piece of code where in the loop body, so what you would do, what you would do over here in this piece of code over here, in one iteration of the loop you would have a load of x i minus one, okay? Multiply with a and then the store of x i. That is one iteration of the loop. Okay? And hey, you know, there is no parallelism necessarily, no possibility of overlapping pretty much anything over here. What you can actually do is you can create a body of the loop where what you're doing is you're doing the load for iteration i, whereas you're doing the execution for iteration i minus one and the store for iteration i minus two. And these are now in a sense over here independent. But then you have to have a loop prologue where, you know, you actually do the loads of several iterations and before you get into the main loop and the execute for iterations and then store for that, then you do the main body in the loop and then you have an epilogue over here. Okay? This is another technique like, so this is what is called software pipelining. Quick sketch, I'm not going to go into more detail over here. To carry out this, you know, software pipelining, you also need to have a very special set of tricks in the register file, which is also what the IA-64 had. I'm not going to go into that. This is a technique that is even quite widely used even just in trying to get, you know, parallelism and overlap between loop iterations when you have an inter-iteration dependence. Okay, now we get to the more interesting part. Well, so, you know, a lot of these VLW processors started out initially for doing scientific, you know, scientific computation, heavy matrix computation, a lot of floating point operations, but, you know, loops that iterated hundreds of times. There wasn't that much other code. Okay? And, but, you know, if you want to have a more general purpose processor, so, you know, you have code with lots of branches. Okay? So, what do you do? Okay. How do you create large scheduling scope from non-loop code? And there's this technique called trace scheduling. The idea is still, you know, used in, you know, compiler optimizations even without, even without other, those process, without VLW kind of processors. Okay, so what you do is you try and find the common paths in a program by profiling the code. Okay? And then you realign the basic blocks in the code to form straight line traces just like the trace cache in some sense. So, this is what is called trace scheduling. The trace cache was a hardware way of trying to rearrange the code that trace scheduling would do. Okay? And the, you know, basic block, as you all know, is a single entry, single exit instruction sequence. A trace is a set of fused basic blocks, a sequence of fused basic blocks. You create a trace, and then once you have a set of instructions in a trace, you can schedule it. Okay? That's fairly easy. But we will see is to be able to have some flexibility in the scheduling, you may have to create some fix-up code in case the trace doesn't actually equal the actual path, and in case some of the scheduling tricks that you do may cause issues. And we'll see that. Okay? And to be able to carry out all of this, you need ISA support for software speculation. We'll see what that is. Yeah? So for all these branchy behaviors, what if we could have special instructions that could pre-bias the branch history and the branch predictors in a way that that could, like, this is a statically scheduled that they aren't using branch predictors. Everything is done in software. Okay? But let's, what you said is, what if I could actually maybe pre-bias the branch, if I had branch predictors maybe pre-bias them and stuff like that. And actually, so, you know, trying to, there has been a lot of proposals, hey, there's certain branches I can mark that I know of, that don't bother the branch predictor. Another thing that people have proposed is, look, you know, branch predictors learns, and then say I have a context switch when I go to another program. But I've learned all the stuff in the branch predictor and now I have to throw it away and learn stuff from the other program, the branch predictor. They also proposed saving the branch predictor state, just like I said, register state and restore it. They're always trade-offs. Okay? There is no free lunch here. They're always trade-offs. Okay? So, but, you know, I mean, if you came, you know, some people have tried all sorts of, yeah, profile it, this branch I know is going to go this way, why bother the branch predictor, etc. But this, that is for dynamic stuff, not for the static stuff. Okay? Okay, now let's take this piece of code here. You know, what this code does, who cares? It's irrelevant, some nonsense piece of code. Okay? So, what this does, you know, if a is a is equal to yi, a equal to zero, a is wi, yi equal to zero, z of i is a star x, who can learn this? This is the machine code, assembly language code for this piece of code over here. And now this piece of code has four basic blocks. I have instruction zero and one. At the end of the basic block A, I have this branch not equal to, either it goes to block zero or block B or block C. In block B, I have a load followed by a jump to block D, instruction five. And in block four, I have a store, and then after that, I come to block D, where I do a load, a multiply, and a store. Okay? Some nonsense piece of code. And now, instruction six is a floating point multiply, and instruction seven is a store, and say this floating point multiply takes three cycles, I'm going to have a three-cycle stall. Okay? What I'd like to do is, I'd like to somehow schedule this multiply, so that there are, you know, other instructions between instruction six and instruction seven. Okay? So, if I need to move this multiply earlier, I'm going to have to basically schedule this multiply to be execute, you know, be in the code before basic block B over here. So, I have to move it above the if then else over here. All right? So, let us try and see how we can sort of do that. Okay? So, the first trace scheduling concept is what is called a superblock, which is originally also called, this is what was originally called the trace. Okay? So, I'm going to profile this branch here, and say I profile the branch, and the result of the profile said, hey, it's going to be taken 95 percent of the time, and not taken five percent of the time. Okay? Then, I want to say, yeah, hey, this branch is highly biased. So, what I'm going to do is, I'm going to create a superblock or a trace with blocks A, C, and D. Fuse them, those blocks from the most AC, even through the most frequent path, schedule them, and if I go ahead and do, if this branch was not taken, and the real path was A, B, and D, then I'm going to go and execute some repair code, which I'm going to create. Are you with me on this? So, what we do is, we took the instructions of A, C, and D, so 0, 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, and created a block. 0, 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, this is the superblock. Okay? But, what we did do is, now, this, we changed the sense of this branch, because, you know, this path was going to be taken, and this path was not taken. Okay? So, we changed the sense of the branch. So, this branch, if it was taken, if it's not taken, we go here, and if it's taken, we go here. So, we did, we flipped it from not equal to, so this original code, which was in the taken path, is now on the fall-through path. Now, what we have also done is, we have created some repair code, so that, if this branch is taken, this branch taken means, this branch was not taken. So, we're going to have to come and execute this and this. So, we're going to create some repair code. We're going to have instruction 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, but I don't need 3, really, because it's going to 5, then jump into 5. So, I'm going to have some repair code, which is going to be instructions 2, 5, 6, and 7. Okay? 2, 5 prime, 6 prime, 7 prime. Okay? Yeah? Where does this repair code exist? Like, is it somewhere else? At the same place where the other code exists. Okay, so it's like right after the super block or something. It could be, who knows where. Okay, then you, then, okay, so it could be right after the super block. Okay, but since this repair code is rarely executed, that's the whole point, is what you actually do is, you know, you try and put all the code that you're going to be executing lightly, one after the other, so it's going to all be in the cache and act in the cache. You don't want the repair code, you know, trying to mess that up, if you will, so you put it a little further away. Yeah? So, we usually, at times, if the case is prediction is wrong, we go with the repair code, but how do we know, like, how do we prepare the repair code? This repair code is going to be triggered by, when this code executes, in the outcome of this branch. What you want to do is, you're going to check to see if, you know, F2 is equal to zero. Okay? Which is, what we were doing, do is, here we are checking F2, if it was not equal to zero, we were going here, if it was equal to zero, we are going here. So here the code is, if it's equal to zero, if it's not equal to zero, we have to go this, if it's equal to zero, we have to go here. Okay? All right. Now, let us try and schedule this piece of code. So, I have zero, one, four, five, six, seven. What I'd like to do is, I'd like to move this multiply instruction earlier. Okay? So, to move this multiply instruction earlier, I also have to move this load instruction earlier, because this multiply needs the result of this load. Okay? So, to move this load instruction earlier, I have to move it past this store instruction. Okay? So, I move instructions five and six above instruction four. This is fine if this load is loading from a different memory address than this store is writing to. Over here, this is fine, we know that x and y are different. Okay? But in reality, what the compiler has to do is, it has to see what is this address, what would this address be, and what would this address be, and can I guarantee they are different? You know, say this was y from r2, for example. Okay? Then, the compiler has to do x added to r1, I don't know what is in r1, is it the same or different from y added to r2? All right? So, if it's different, then it's fine, otherwise what we need to do is we need to do something. So, now this is where life starts getting interesting. Okay? So, what we need to do is basically we need to be able to speculate that this load is not going to load from an address that this store is going to write. So, that reordering is fine. So, we have to support, have support for load store speculation. Okay? What do we do? This repair code is the same, it's not, this repair code is common. This repair code that we have is common because we constructed a super block in this branch, not because of any scheduling of code. That's not going to change. So, what we're going to do is, this load, we are going to mark it, especially, we call it an advanced load. So, now it's having an up code, previously it was just floating point load, now it's called floating point load.a saying that this is a load that got advanced before another store instruction that I do not know. All right? And then, what I'm going to do is, I'm going to have a piece of hardware, which in the x86, IA64, they call an advanced load alias table, an ALAT, where some of the academic work called it a memory conflict buffer. Okay? So, now what we're going to do is, when we have an advanced load, when this advanced load executes, okay, it's going to put in the ALAT information about the execution of the advanced load. What is it going to put in there? It's going to put the address that it loaded from. It's going to put the register F4, that is the target that I wrote from that address. It's going to put, you know, some other things that are, you know, bytes there, whatever it is, you know, it's like, these are the two important things. Okay? Then, at the original position of the load, I'm going to have a check.a instruction. Okay? This check.a instruction is going to check something with F4, and if this check fails, if check passes, then keep going and do nothing. It's a no-op. If the check fails, it's going to do something. All right? Then, when a store executes, okay, are we having fun yet? It's going to get much more interesting. When the store executes, you know the address the store is storing into. You will present that address to the ALAT. Okay? If the address matches an address in the ALAT, that entry is going to be made invalid. All right? Now, what this check does, this check instruction goes to the ALAT with F4 and says, is there a valid entry for F4? Okay? If there is, then no store occurring between the load and the check invalidated that entry corresponding to F4, which was the entry corresponding to the address that this load loaded from, which means there was no intervening store that wrote to the same address. Okay? Because if it wrote to the same address, it would have invalidated that entry and that check would fail. All right? So again, advance means you advance past some unknown store, processor stores the address and the register number of the advance loads in the ALAT. Later stores source the ALAT. If there is a matching address, invalidate the ALAT entry. This check instruction checks to make sure that the ALAT entry corresponding to, in this case, F4 is still valid. If it is, all is good. This speculation was correct. If it is, now you go and branch to some other repair code, instruction line. What that repair code looks like, I don't know. It's ugly. Yeah. And using things like restrict pointers and C code lets us do this optimization on computers that don't have these advance loads, right? So like using things like restrict pointers and C, which variously say like, oh these two pointers can't be the same, that lets us do this optimization on like a computer that doesn't have the advance load of the load before the store. Yes. Well no, if the compiler can know that the two addresses of a load and store are different, it can do the optimization regardless. How it knows it, if the semantics of the code are saying that's the case, or it actually can do a lot of compiler analysis, a lot of work has been done in compiler analysis to figure out whether two addresses are the same. Yeah. So during the store, we searched for the address on the register and if it is not found, we clear it. That means basically there was a collision, right? Like the ALAT was cleared while the store instruction was executed. So basically we will have to then non-speculatively execute the load again, right? Okay, so if this check did not find that, means that it was invalid in the ALAT, means it was a store of the same address, you don't have to jump to this repair code. This repair code is going to have to do all of that in order. Okay, like you said that if you have a very large program, right, and if it may span like multiple pages, then you might not want to keep your repair code which is by your trace. Trace analysis is not going to be, you know, frequently called. Then when you ever actually do hit these repair codes, that would mean a severe penalty because now you have to go to the OS, the OS will do its page-driven thing. The first time you hit it, you have to do all of that, but then it's there, at least in memory. Yeah, you know, it hurts. So if something hurts, you don't do it. But, you know, that's right. Yes, yes. How do we know that that check A at line A is in reference to five, line five? Couldn't we get ourselves in trouble where we say like we're loading an address, we're done with it, and we bump into the check, but we're really, you know, register for is doing something different now? Or am I... Do you understand this question? What are you saying? How do we know? How do we know the check? What does a check check? Basically. Someone will help me. The check only exists because we are advancing this door. No, but what does a check mean? Someone help me. So below the van stores the address registered pair, right? If there's a store to the address, then that validates the pair. So when you check the register that says no, that register pair is no longer valid. You check F4, which also means then, means that no other instruction can write into F4. But can we get false positives into you? I mean, which would just essentially send us down the repair code, but... No, because you aren't going to have to do instructions writing to the same register. This is also where like the strength of just-in-time compilation comes from, because if our trace is just completely wrong, we're going to be constantly going down the repair code. So being able to redo this when time comes sort of helps a lot. And this has actually been one of the points of just-in-time compilation is to actually change the code dynamically. That also has overrides. Okay. Other questions about this? It's just beginning, by the way. All right. Okay. So what we did do is we moved instruction five and six before four. Now I want to move five and six even before this branch before one. All right. What is it I'm trying to do basically? This is five and six. I'm trying to move it above this branch. Okay. Actually, in this case, this load was executed regardless of which direction the branch went. So executing it before the branch. However, you know, you don't... That is not necessarily the case, and we will see next. Okay. What we don't want to do is we don't want to move this store before this branch. Okay. What am I saying over here is I don't want to move this store before this branch over here. Because if the branch goes up this path, this store is not taken. Importantly, anytime you do a store, it's writing something to memory. So if I want to undo this store, it gets... Once I have written something to memory, it becomes much more complicated. Okay. Further, importantly, when you see many have a multi-process, this store can trigger a coherence event. So we never want to write to memory unless we in a speculative manner. You only want to write to memory when we know that's going to have to happen. Okay. But now if you did all of this, hey, you know, we got three instructions between the multiply and the store. Let us say now the branch had the opposite bias over here. Okay. So this was the path that was taken 95 percent of the time. This was taken 5 percent of the time. So we create a block AVD, and then we have repair code of CD. Okay. So we create the super block of, you know, with 0, 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and then the repair code will have 4, 5, 6, 7. Okay. But now this branch sense has unchanged because this is now from the... If this branch is taken, you will go and execute the repair code. Okay. Now let us try and schedule this super block. So we want to execute this super block over here. Okay. What's now... We want to move this multiply before the store. Before, you know, separated from the store. This multiply. This load is providing an input to this multiply. This load is providing another input to this multiply. So we also have to move the two loads earlier. And the only place earlier we can move them is before this branch instruction. Okay. So we move the 2, 5, and 6 above instruction 1. And this branch instruction was checking F2. This load was writing into F2. That becomes a write after read hazard. So what we're going to do now is we're going to change the name of this F2 to F8, and this multiply then gets F8 over here. Okay. Is this movement fine? Okay. Store is not writing anything incorrect to memory, so that's okay. Okay. Load is reading something, and if I don't do anything with what I read, that seems okay. Okay. But what if I have a fault in one of the instructions that I had moved before? Okay. So what I'm saying is that, okay, is I am moving at instruction this load to before this branch, and it had a fault. Say you have a software writer. Wrote this piece of code, and you know, you had some assertions over here before you did the load to make sure it wasn't loading from a bad address. Okay. And that's what you do. Hey, you know, make sure that code is correct. This load could load from bad address. Do the checks to make sure the load is not loading from a bad address, just like you do a, you know, check to see if x equal to zero before you do y divided by x. Okay. You've done all of that, and you have a fault. Code's not. Okay. What do you do? You're never going to buy that piece of junk again. So this is, you know, when some of these things are closely saying this, who's going to be responsible for the error when something like that happens? Okay. So what you have to do instead now is you say that this load is, what is it, a speculative load, means it advanced past some unknown branch. All right. So what a speculative load does is it does the load, okay, right into the register. But if it has an exception, the exception is not recognized for that load instruction at that point. Instead, you send a bit in their destination register, saying an exception occurred for this register. Okay. Then at the original position of the load, you have a check speculative instruction which checks F8. If the exception bit of F8 is not set, all is good. If the exception bit is set, then this load caused an exception, and that this is the place where the exception should be recognized. And if there is an exception, then you have to jump to some more repair. I-8-64 also contains a speculative and advanced load, and that's why you need many more outputs too. Okay. Questions about this? Very interesting stuff. So as long as you don't have to do it. Yeah. So then so the exception is checked for first, but if it was there, it was executed later. The exception occurred, remember now, when we even talked about previously in my simple point. You can get an exception, but not recognized until later. That's what we did. Even in the end order pipeline, if I had a bad opcode in decode, I don't recognize it till the end of the pipeline. Okay, if I had an arithmetic overflow or whatever it is, I don't recognize it till the end of the pipeline. So here the exception is occurring in the processing of the load, but it's not recognized until the check instruction. So then this is, you know, dealing with the paper you just reviewed, is what if the branches are not biased in one way? They can happen both ways. Then what you do is you carry out what is called predicated execution. So what you do is instead of this branch instruction over here, you have an instruction which sets a predicate based on this condition. It sets a predicate, zero or one. If the branch is not taken and the predicate is zero, then these instructions are executed subject to the predicate. Subject to the predicate means the instructions are executed, but if the predicate is not true, then that instruction dynamically becomes a no-op, okay? So with predication, I'm going to have basically, you know, set a predicate, compare this condition, set an outcome of the condition in this predicate register over here, okay, P1. Then this load instruction is going to take place. The load is going to be a load. If this predicate is true, the load is going to be a no-op if the predicate is true, okay? And this load is going to happen if this predicate is false, P1 is false, so not predicated is true, and this load is not going to happen if the predicate is true. So you can use what is this predicated execution where you conditionally execute instructions that are fetched unconditionally. So I'm actually going to fetch all the instructions, decode all these instructions, even execute them, but actually maybe only conditionally write back the results of unrecognized extensions. So you can have full predication that every instruction can be executed with a predicate. IA 64 does that, ARM also has that. Okay, and for a while predicated execution was, hey, you know, I have branches, this is a way to try and deal with them. Let me try and actually see how I can bring in predicated execution into a conventional ISA. Okay, so here's how they did that. What they did is, what predicated execution is saying is, look, you are moving, you are executing instructions from both paths. Okay, and so say that I had a add instruction here that wrote into R2 from this path, an add instruction that wrote into R2 on this path. Okay, and then an add instruction that reads R2 over here. Okay, so the R2 that this add instruction reads is either this R2 or this R2. I don't know, based on the predicate. Okay, and I don't have predication. So what I can do is, I can execute this add instruction, have it right into R10 and this instruction right into R11. Okay, and then have a conditional move instruction over here which will conditionally move either R10 or R11 to R2 based on this condition over here. Are you with me on that? What's the benefit of this over just having a pipeline that just speculatively executes operations and then knocks them out when the branch is decided? Because both paths are equally likely. So what I'm doing is I'm only executing instructions from one path, so I'll be wrong half the time. In a sense, what predication is saying is, hey, you know, if I'm going to be wrong half the time, just do extra work from both paths and then we'll figure it out later on. Okay? Okay, so, you know, this requires some, you know, code duplication. So like I gave you the example, you know, based on, you can have some, you know, conditional moves over there. And there are different forms of those instruction people. And the technique of basically taking these if then else pieces of code, okay, and creating them into predicated code is what is called if conversion where you are replacing a control dependence with a data dependence. Okay, you're replacing control with predication, and I won't go more into that. The compiler people have, you know, a lot of work on that. So, okay, now let me briefly talk about the ISA support for predicated execution. So, you know, again, this was this piece of code. What I'm going to do is I'm going to have an instruction that sets a predicate register, P1's a predicate register, and IA64 has 64 predicate registers. Okay, and then these instructions, this instruction or this instruction, two or four is going to execute based on the value of this predicate register, whether the predicate is true or predicate is not true, only one of them is going to execute. And these instructions are as simple. So what we've done is we've actually fused all these four blocks and used predication to conditionally execute instructions in either block B or block C. And once I have this fused block then I can use my other techniques that I talked about with advanced loads and particularly executed loads, because not every branch I'm going to necessarily use this is for the, you know, branches that are not biased in one direction. What happens if branches have calls? What happens if branches have calls? Okay, actually let me step back. We can start the conversation now, but we're going to continue next time, so please mind we have this time next time. So we've talked about all this, I'm going to move this code from here, move it there, and advance it past this load, and do this, and so on, yada, yada, yada, okay? Procedures are natural boundaries, outside of which I cannot move code easily. So the branch, you know, I think we can finish this discussion, okay? So that greatly limits, you know, the scope in which I can sketch it. When we talk about dynamic schedule, it won't care if it comes from the procedure, it won't just move on, just another stupid set of bits, that's all, okay? And so if now you have a branch that had a call, well, the brace, the basic block, ends at that call, and it's not going to do anything beyond that call. That kind of limits the compiling, I think. It absolutely limits the compiler, but then, you know, they have come up with clever techniques of doing, and then further, then you also have you know, an interprocedural analysis to try and figure out if the stores are one procedure and the loads are a different procedure, when, you know, with the procedure it's going to be a little more trusty, easier, and, but you know, see, the one thing that you will learn over the years is the last one, okay? And when you're saying, oh yeah, the procedure limits the boundary, and yeah, maybe it does, they'll come up with some clever techniques where you can do it in certain cases, and they have. But otherwise, the procedure is a natural one.
