Title: 752_Lec7
Source file: 752_Lec7.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Okay, I think, and then we'll work out, all right. And of course, you're not gonna finish by having to read the schedule, it's like, we'll eventually make it up, but, you know, we'll take it in our own place. Anyone have any questions so far? I wanna go back a little bit to this clock and latch over head again, all right, you know? The clock skew and data skew. So, you know, what we said with the clock skew is that, hey, you know, you have to clock the latches later in the pipeline, okay? Than the ones earlier in the pipeline. The clock could end up getting skewed, because of the skewing, you have to make sure that as you do the clocking, the data doesn't enter, doesn't run into, from one instruction doesn't run into that from the other instruction. And then we talk about data skew, which is the time, difference in time between the maximum and minimum delay for any of those bits of instruction through a stage of the pipeline. And if you can make the maximum and minimum close to each other, okay? Then, you know, then you can start a new instruction in the stage before the previous instruction is left, okay? So, in a sense, you can clock this latch to start a new instruction before the previous one has left and entered here, and then clock this one before this instruction has left, this instruction has left the stage and a new one. So, in a sense, in an end stage pipeline, you have more than end instructions, okay? And then, you know, in sort of the limit, you don't even need these latches if you will. And that is why you can have more than an end speedup with an end stage pipeline, because you have more than end instructions with that. Yeah? Just a quick question about the equations given. Yeah. Should we memorize those for the future exams or just something we shouldn't know what they mean? Oh my god. You know what I mean? I have to ask. You know, yeah, it's like, okay, you know, probably a good response to that might be a professor. Have you memorized them? How can you? I don't know. So, no. No, no, I don't expect you to memorize any of that stuff. No. Okay. So, you know, you don't manage the pipeline installed in the plot document, okay? And you see that uses, nah, I'm going forward. All right. So, what are the different types of hazards? Well, first of all, structural hazards. A structural hazard occurs if there is a resource that's needed twice in one cycle. Okay? So, you know, I have this piece of code going to a pipeline, I have a load instruction. The load instruction in the MAM state accesses the cache. And then, you know, in a labor instruction, in the FAC stage, I'm also accessing the cache. So, if I have only one cache for both instructions and data, I have a structural hazard, and I can only have one instruction, being the resource serving only one instruction in that cycle, okay? So, how do we handle data? How do we fix structural hazards? We can fix structural hazards by stalling the instruction. So, here, what we are doing is, we are stalling this, while the load instruction is accessing the cache for data, we are stalling any instruction that would be, you know, accessing the cache to fetch the instruction. So, we're stalling simply because we're going to memory? Simply because we have two instructions accessing the same resource. I see, and in this case, it's the cache that we're... It is a single cache that is holding both the instructions and data. I see, okay. Typically, we have a instruction cache and a memory cache. Well... We'll get there. And why do we have that? So that you don't do this? So you don't have the structural hazard. Okay, all right. But, you know, so, a S star that I have is a structural hazard, okay? So you can stall, a structural stall, to resolve that structural hazard. Now, the question you have is, you know, which one to stall? In such a situation, it's always safe to stall the younger one, so that the older ones can proceed and clear that structural hazard, okay? And so, you know, the logic to figure out whether there's a structural hazard is going to be, in a sense, the instruction that is in the mem stage, okay? Is it going to be accessing memory? And which are the instructions that access the cache or memory? Either loads or stores, okay? And if that instruction is going to be accessing memory, then I need to stall the instruction in the fetch stage over here, okay? So, here's my pipeline, okay? Here's the mem stage. And so, in this latch over here, which is the latch, the XM latch, okay? If the outcord of that instruction in that stage is either a load or a store, okay? Then I know that I need to stall the instruction in the fetch stage, okay? So, what the logic is saying is, hey, if the outcord of the instruction in the, from the XM latch, if that's a load, or if it's a store, then I'm gonna have to stall, okay? If you're trying to do this, you're gonna see many more incarnations of something like this going on. Now, you know, I won't get into this because sometimes it's actually better to stall the earlier instruction and let the later instruction go because you may end up, that may end up taking more time and have a more impact on the agency, but we won't get into that over here, okay? But it's, stalling the older one is, stalling the younger one is safe over here. Make sure everything's, you know, doesn't get you into issues. May not be sort of the best performance-wise. Okay, it's low cost, but it's gonna decrease the IPC every time, in a sense, I have a load or a store instruction. I'm going to stall another instruction. 30% of the instructions are load and store, then 30% of the time, I'm going to have to stall the instruction fetch, okay? So we're gonna fix it, and there are three ways of trying to deal with structural hazards. PRS, pipeline, replicate, or schedule. Not all, these are all you can do, all of them, too. Where, what you do is, you know, you have the resource and you're going to pipeline it so you can actually have multiple different instructions in that resource. So if I have like a multiplier that's gonna take three, four, five cycles, then rather than stall another instruction from using that for four or five cycles, I can pipeline that resource, okay? So there's no IPC degradation, and you know, pipelining is, takes a little more than just the resource, but not 2X, for example, the hardware, okay? And you don't have the additional logic over there. But, you know, for things like RAMs, you just, you know, it's not easy to pipeline those. You can replicate the contended resource, okay? There is no IPC degradation, but there is increases in power, area, and latency, perhaps, because of it, right? And you're going to do that for very highly contended resources. Instruction, you know, and data accesses are highly contended, so you're going to duplicate that resource. So we're gonna have a separate instruction cache and a data cache, okay? You can also, you know, schedule the pipelines so that, and further design an instruction set, so it's going to use only one resource at most, one resource at a time, a resource at most once. Okay, that's why we were talking a little bit about the different types of branch instructions. We talked about, hey, I need two ALUs, and so on like that, those are resources, okay? So if an instruction uses a resource only once, at most once, you know, it doesn't have a resource conflict with it itself, okay? And further, I'm going to use the resource, make sure that all instructions use the resource in the same clock cycle, at the same stage of the pipeline, and always for one clock cycle. What is this'll be here? Okay, so here, you know, the load instruction goes and accesses memory, and then it writes the result in the register file in the writeback cycle. The add instruction, okay, is channel long, it's done at the end of the execute stage. It could write the result into the register file in clock cycle five, okay? But we are saying, no, you're going to also go through memory, do nothing, and not be able to write the register file into clock cycle six, because if we allow it to write over here, then we'd have to determine that there's a structural hazard over here for the write the register file that we have to deal with. Okay, so you can schedule the pipeline to reduce the structural hazards in an always active, access the resource in the same pipeline stage. Questions? Yeah. So, if you multiply, and you start breaking that into multiple pipeline stages, I can see where that helps you with the multiply, but doesn't, like, not every instruction's a multiply, so, you know, what, are you wasting pipeline stages because, you know, the load doesn't need to go through five stages? So, those five-stage pipeline is going to be... Yeah, but now it's 10, right? It was five, you added five stages for the multiply, right, in that... No, it's not, it's more than 10. It's not one linear pipeline. It is these parallel pipelines, multiple pipelines. Okay, so the loads, the integer, the load is just going to go through here. If it's a multiply, it'll go this way, and now then you're going to say, okay, now, what about all the other right backs and this and that? We'll get to that. We'll figure it out. I see. So, okay, so the multiply's not going down the picture that we have, it's going someplace else. It's going down more of this picture. Yeah. You said these were really for the floating points, but... I gotcha, yeah. Floating points, you're generally doing for some of the, you know, multiplies to more so. But yeah, even though with that, you'd go through a different pipeline. This is a very simple pipeline. Okay? All right. Now let's talk about the interesting stuff, which are data hazards. Okay? So an instruction can read values and create the right values, okay? And the way you do that is the instruction writes into a storage element, a register or a memory, okay? And an instruction reads operands from a storage element, a register or a memory, okay? So, so I can have, what are the different kinds of data dependence relationships, okay? The first one is an instruction could be writing into a register, let's say, a value, and then a later instruction reading from the same register, okay? And that is what is called a read-after-write dependence. And this kind of dependence really is also called a true dependence because for correct execution, a value must flow from this instruction to this instruction. And the way it flows from this instruction to this instruction is you write the value into R1, and this instruction reads R1. That's what you're trying to do over there. Okay? I could read a value, read a register, and a later instruction write into a register, okay? So, this is what is called a write-after-read or an anti-dependence. And here, there is no value flowing from this instruction to this instruction. Okay? The only reason why I have this anti-dependence over here is because for this instruction, for the result of this instruction, I chose to use register R2 and this instruction for its input operand was going to read register R2, but the values over here are very different. Okay, they're not the same values. Okay? And these dependencies, what's going to, you know, they're going to become important because any time we want to change the ordering of the instructions, we must make sure that the dependencies are respected. Okay? The third kind of dependency is the first could be instruction, could be writing into a register, second instruction could be also writing into the same register, or the same storage location, memory, register. Okay? So, this is what is called a write-after-write or output dependence. So, first, the output register of the first and the second instruction is same. However, these are very different values. This, I'm writing, this was writing one, some value, this is writing a completely different value, a new value over there, okay? So, instead of, you know, so there is a write-after-write dependence between these two instructions because you're both writing R1. If instead of R1 over here, this was R7, then I won't have a write-after-write dependence. Okay? So, the fourth possibility is the first instruction could be reading a register and then, you know, second instruction could be also reading the register. Okay? Those are the four possibilities of read-after-write. Okay? That is not a problem because changing the order of two instructions, if they read the same right input, it's not gonna be a problem because you're still going to get this, both of them are still gonna get the correct input. Okay? All right. So, these are data dependencies, true read-after-write, write-after-write, write-after-write, and actually the fourth one is read-after-read, okay? And these dependencies can, they are a property of the program in the instruction set. Okay? And this true dependence, that is the one that has the highest priority because this one must be respected, period. A data hazard occurs when you are doing something incorrect because of a data dependence, potential for doing something incorrect because of a data dependence. And we are gonna see the data hazards, and of course, we have to avoid the data hazards. Okay, people, many, you know, routinely get confused between dependence and hazard. They call these data hazards. No, these are data dependencies and a data hazard is a result of a dependence and a pipeline and, you know, and the pipeline organization, which, you know, give fear to potentials for executing these dependence on the wrong one. It's also true that for a hazard to potentially occur, both the instructions must be in the pipeline at the same time. And the instructions that are being processed, we're gonna call it in-flight, so both those instructions must be in-flight at the same time. Okay, so far so good. Now, let me take a piece of code, which is executing in a loop, and this is doing what is called a double precision, AX plus Y, so A times XI plus YI gets ZI, and I'm doing it in a loop. And here's the piece of code for the loop. And what I'm gonna try and do is I'm gonna try and find the read-after-write dependencies, write-after-read dependencies, and the write-after-write dependencies. Both within the instructions are in an iteration of the loop, and across the iterations of the loop. Okay? So I'm gonna separate the read-after-write dependencies that are intra-loop iterations and inter-loop iterations. Okay? All right. So, this instruction zero is loading into F2. Instruction one has F2 as an input, so there is a read-after-write dependence between zero and one through register F2 over here. Read-after-write between zero and one through register F2. Okay? Instruction one is writing into F4. Instruction three is reading F4. So there is a read-after-write dependence between one and three through F4. Okay? Instruction two is writing into F6. Instruction three is reading F6. So there's a read-after-write inter-dependence between two and three through F6. Three is writing F4. Sorry, three is writing F8. Four is reading F8. So, the dependence would be three and four through F8. Five is reading R1 and writing R1. Okay? And six is reading R1, so there's a dependence between five and six through R1. And six is writing into R2. Seven is reading R2, six through six and seven through R2. Okay? Now, if I go now between the loops, okay, if I take a look at this instruction, it's reading R1. So, this instruction in the second iteration is reading R1 from the first iteration. Okay? So, instruction five wrote into R1 in one iteration, iteration I. Instruction zero of iteration I plus one is reading R1. So, there's a read-after-write dependence inter-iteration between five and zero through R1. Similarly, there is one between five and two through R1, five and four through R1. And instruction five is reading as input the R1 of the previous iteration and writing R1 in this iteration. So, there's between five and itself through R1. Okay? What about the write-after-read? Okay? Write-after-read, you know, zero is reading R1, five is writing R1, so that is between zero and five between through R1. Very similarly, two is reading R1 and five is writing R1. Zero and five through R1, and also four is reading R1 and five is writing R1 between four and five through R1. Inter-iteration dependencies, okay? So, you know, register one, sorry, instruction zero of the second iteration is writing into F2. And, you know, instruction one of the first iteration is reading F2. So, there is a write-after-read between one and zero through F2, okay? And you can do the rest of these. What about write-after-write? A write-after-write happens when two instructions are writing into the same register. This is writing into F2, this is writing into F4, this is writing into F6, this is writing into F8, this is not writing into any register, this is writing into R1, this is writing into R2. So, no two instructions in the same iteration are writing into the same register. So, there is no write-after-write interrupts iteration, okay? But, between iterations, you know, the same instruction of the different iterations are writing into the same register. So, there's a write-after-write dependence between any instruction that writes into a register and itself from the previous iteration. Questions? Yeah. So, this assumes that this pipeline is way more than seven instructions. Right. That's not assuming anything of a pipeline. This is just talking about dependencies. Oh, okay, so we're not through the hazards. Okay. We are not through the hazards yet. Okay. Other questions? Now, let's take a look at the read-after-write dependence and see the potential for hazard creation and what we have to do. So, I have this piece of code, add writing into R1, subtract reading R1, and if I somehow change the order of the add and subtract, then, you know, the subtract is going to use the wrong value of R1. There's a true value, and if I used a different output register for add, it's not going to make any difference. Because if it's a true dependence or a value flow or a flow dependence, or a read-after-write dependence, all mean the same thing. Let's take a look at this pipeline and see, a simple pipeline, and see what we're going to have to do. All right. So, here's a piece of code. This add instruction is going to go through fetch, decode, execute, memory, write back, and R1 is going to be written into the exit file. Let's assume for the time being at the end of the long cycle file. Okay. So now, you know, I must make sure that the subtract does not get the wrong value of R1. So, I need to have some stall logic to check to see if there is a potential of getting the wrong value, and if so, I must stall. Okay. So, the subtract instruction that needs R1, okay, I must make sure that no instruction ahead of it in the pipeline is going to write into register R1. Okay. And how do I know what are the instructions ahead of me and if they write into the same register as me? Okay. These latches of the pipeline have the information about the instruction and what their source registers are and what their destination registers are. Okay. So, what I must do is, I must check to see, hey, I am, this is the instruction, the subtract instruction, in this case, is reading from this first register, our source register. This first source register is R1. Happens to be R1 in this case. Okay. Happens to be R1. Second source register is R4. Okay. So, if I am reading from, this instruction is reading from a register. If this instruction is not reading from a register, then there's no problem. Okay. And, the instruction that is just one ahead of me, which is the instruction in this stage, it is going to write into a register and my source register is the same as its destination register. Then I must stop. Okay. Or the instruction, or the instruction in this stage, which is two ahead of me. Okay. And that is the instruction in the XM latch. Okay. So, if I am reading a register and the instruction in this stage is writing a register and Rd is destination register, then I must stop. Okay. Or the instruction in the write back stage. Okay. If it's going to write into a register, so the information that's there in this MW latch, it's writing into R1 and I'm reading R1 and I must stop. Okay. So, that's the logic. That's going to be the stall logic for an instruction to stall to make sure I don't have a data hazard. Okay. For the first source register of an instruction. Same thing for the second source register of the instruction. How do I stall? You just don't activate these, you know, this latch to let a new instruction come in. Okay. But I must keep activating these latches to allow these instructions to keep flowing through. Okay. And in every cycle, I'm going to re-evaluate this logic until it's no longer true and then this instruction can proceed. Okay. Are you with me on this? So far, so good. Fairly low cost, you know, but there's a degradation because dependencies are the very common case. And if you don't have dependency in a program, it's not a very interesting program. It's an AI program with matrix multiple. Okay. Not very interesting. Okay. So now, let's start trying to, you know, build on that and start seeing if you can do something clever. So assume that in my pipeline that I have, that the, you know, the register, you know, the reason, if I, the reason I want to keep them small, I actually want to be able to access more than one clock cycle even in half a clock cycle. Okay. And say my pipeline is designed so that you write into the register file in the second half of the clock cycle and read in the first half of the clock cycle. Okay. All right. So, this add instruction is going to write its result into R1 at the end of clock cycle five. And so in the beginning of clock cycle five, if I read the R1, I would get the wrong value. Okay. So the subtract instruction can only get into the decode stage and read the register file in the first half of the clock cycle six. Okay. So for this pipeline, I must have three cycles stall due to the data dependence that I have, data stall. And any instruction behind this now must also stall and that is what's called a propagated stall piece. Okay. So far so good. Now let me change the pipeline. How I, you know, when I write into the register file, say I write into the register file in the first half of the clock cycle and I read in the second half of the clock cycle. Okay. Now, what I can do is that in the first half of clock cycle five, okay, the add instruction will write into R1 and the subtract instruction can read from R1 the correct value by reading it in the second half of the clock cycle. Okay. So it can be in the decode stage in clock cycle five unlike previously this clock cycle six. So now it's only going to stall for two cycles. Okay. How does the stall logic here change? This term would not be there. So far so good. So we've done good here. The problem is these dependencies are so common. Anytime I have a stall, I'm losing big time. Okay. So what else can I do? So what I can do is I can basically reduce these stalls and mostly eliminate them with bypassing or bypass logic. Okay. So what is the rationale behind this bypass logic? So if I go back to this diagram over here, let's use this one over here. Okay. The add instruction, the value of R1 that produced was ready at the end of clock cycle three. Okay. So, but it took me two more clock cycles to write it. Why so? Because I had to respect the structure or otherwise might be a structure of hazards and so on like that. Okay. So that value is ready in clock cycle three. So this subtract instruction could actually get that value at the end of clock cycle three and start working with it in clock cycle four. Okay. Then the subtract instruction reads the value from the rescue file in the decode phase. But it's not doing anything with the value until it gets to the execute stage. Okay. So can I have it read the old value and just drop it? And when I get the new value, use that new value instead to carry out the operation. Okay. So that is what bypassing is going to be. So what I'm gonna do is that now do the input of the execute stage, which is the input to the ALP. What I'm gonna do is the operation of the execute stage is gonna be carried out in this ALU. The input to the ALU previously was the register that I read. Okay. So I'm showing the diagram for the second source register that I read. Now, the input of this ALU, I'm gonna have a multiplexer and the inputs to the multiplexer would be some bits, which are the output of this latch over here, which is the bits corresponding to the instruction in this stage. And other, some bits from this latch over here, which is the bits corresponding to the instruction in this stage. Okay. So now what I'm gonna do is rather than use this input value, which corresponds to what the instruction read in the decode stage from source register two, I'm gonna use either that value or this value or this value. Okay. So I'm going to bypass or forward the data directly from somewhere to the input of this ALU here. I can also do the same to forward it to the input of this mem stage to write a value into the data cache. Previously, you know, which instruction writes into the value in the data cache or store instruction. What a store instruction is doing, it reads something from the register file. When does it do that in the decode stage? Okay. So I can read some value and then by time store gets the mem stage, it says, no, no, no, use this newer value, which is the correct value. Okay. So these are all these wires and this reduces the stalls in a big way. Okay. So, you know, we have this, we have a MX bypass from the beginning of mem to the input of X, the execute stage. We have a WX bypass from the beginning of the write back into the input of the execute stage. We also have a WM bypass from the write back stage to the input of the mem stage over here. Okay. This is the logic for one input. We also would have a similar set of logic for the, so now what we're gonna have is you're gonna have bypass logic to control the multiplexers over here to determine which of these inputs should be selected. Okay. That is going to be the bypass control logic, bypass logic. It's very similar, but it's separate from the stall logic. Why is it similar? Because it's also taking a look at whether an instruction is reading a register and whether another instruction is writing a register. Okay. So what is that logic gonna look like? So for the multiplexer at this input of the ALU, okay, what are you gonna do is, okay, so you're going to select this input of the ALU if the instruction at this stage is reading a register. Okay. And if the instruction at this stage is writing a register and the destination register is the same as the source register of this instruction. Okay. Then the bits that are going to get written into that register are one, are here, I'm gonna pull them from here, put them to the inputs of the multiplexer, from here they'll go to the input of the ALU. Okay. This is the instruction at this stage is the instruction that is immediately preceding this instruction. Okay. So this is the one that's going to have the most importance. Okay. So say this instruction is reading R1 at this stage, this instruction is writing into R1. Okay. See also this instruction is writing into R1 in the write back stage. Okay. The R1 that this instruction must get should be the R1 from this instruction over here, not the R1 from this one. All right. So if this instruction doesn't write into R1, this does, then that's, then you select this input of the multiplexer, which are these bits over here, and that is, hey, the instruction in this decode stage, in the execute stage, which is this latch, is writing into its register is the same as the AND. This instruction is writing into a register and these two registers are the same. Then you use this input, otherwise you use this input. Okay. So far so good. Now let's take a look at the pipeline diagram when I had bypasses. The piece of code that I had over here, this AND instruction R1 is ready at the end of clock cycle three. Decode is in clock cycle three. You know, in clock cycle four, I can let the subtract go from decode to execute with the old value that is written about R1 from the register file. But bypass the value from this AND instruction, which is in the mem stage, to the subtract instruction and the subtract instruction can execute correctly in clock cycle four. This is now a piece of code that's using the bypass from the W to X. All right. Where this AND instruction is writing to R1, there happens to be some more instruction between the AND and the subtract instruction that uses the R1. Okay. And so this instruction is in the write back stage when this instruction would like to enter into the execute stage. So you have bypassing from, you know, this WX, you know, MW latch to the input over here. There. How about, can you give me an example of an instruction, a code sequence that using this bypass over here? Okay. So I bypass from the W stage to the M stage. W and bypass. So basically I'm bypassing the value from the, you know, this stage to the M stage. What do we have? A store whose input is very strong. Okay. All right. So things are good when I have arithmetic instructions only, okay. But if life were that good, you know, hardware engineers won't get paid much. So you have to have more complications. Okay. So what happens when you have a load instruction that loads into an register and another instruction that reads that register also called a load use. So a load instruction is going to the pipeline like a, not bothering anyone, not being bothered by anyone over here. But unlike arithmetic instruction where the value, register value was ready at the end of clock cycle three for the load, the register value is not ready until clock cycle four. So this subtract cannot get the correct value until clock cycle five. Therefore the subtract cannot be in the execute stage until clock cycle five. So if it was decoded in clock cycle three, you must have a different data store. The store, you could either store the subtract either in execute or in, you know, decode. It sort of doesn't matter, but you need to create a store. Okay. If now, here I'm saying this takes one cycle. Data cache access. What if I have a data cache miss where now it may take many more cycles? That's all that you have. What you're gonna do is you're gonna say, in a sense, forget about arithmetic instructions and data hazards and data dependency do them. We can, we know how to handle them with bypass. Bypass is just a very straightforward. But appreciate that, hey, now what I have is for each bypass path, you know, I've drawn a line over here. Exactly 64 bits wide. Okay. If I have 64 bit data. And what we will see when we talk about multiple issue, I'm trying to do N. So here now I have, you know, two different bypass paths if you will. Two sets of bypass paths. What you'll see when we do multiple issue is if I'm trying to do N wide, we'll have off the order of N squared bypass path. Just to make life more interesting. Just to use. You know, we got all this logic there. World's our giver. Okay. All these transistors. They're gonna be good use. All right. But let us talk about, you know, basic concept of trying to deal with the stall due to load use. How to reduce those load use stall, okay? Now, what I can do to reduce load use stalls basically is, you know, make sure that the instruction that reads the value that the load is loading into in this case, okay? Does not enter the execute stage until clock cycle five. Okay. If then, in that case, I can make the bypass work, okay? And how do I get rid of that stall in between? If now there was another instruction over here, that is the instruct, and it didn't need R1. That is the instruction which would enter the decode, execute stage in clock cycle four. And the subtract that came after that would naturally enter the execute stage in clock cycle five in a way of the bypass that I already had. No stalls. All right. So, let me take a piece of code over here where there are two expressions I'm trying to solve. A gets B plus C, D gets F minus E, and this is the code that A gets B plus C, and this is the code for D gets F minus E. Okay. I take a look at this piece of code here. Load into R2, load into R3, read after write dependence between R2 and R3, and then write into R1, store R1, read after write dependence between R1 and between this add and store. Okay. Now, if I execute this piece of code like here, I'm going to have a load use stall because this add instruction that reads R3 is immediately following this load instruction over here. Okay. To avoid this load use stall, what I can do is if I were able to put some other instruction in between over here, I would have that load install. Okay. So, what I want to do is I am going to pull out this instruction, which is writing into register R5, and its input is not being bothered by anyone else, and move it between this load and this add. Then I'm going to pull out this store instruction and move it between this load and this subtract over here. All right. That's what I do over here. Now, when I execute this piece of code, I've left my simple five page pipeline. This use is separated by another instruction from this load. This use is separated from this load by another instruction. I don't have that. So, I'm going to do it. Okay. So, this is what I like to be able to do. And this is sort of, you know, like we only had a few tricks. We're going to play the trick in different manners. All right. So, this compiler scheduling is to rearrange this code to avoid those solves. We're going to talk about as if it were done in solve. Okay. So, in the next few lectures, we figured out, we talked about doing it in software and in the compiler. When we get to out of order execution process or the dynamic IOP, we will do a lot of this in hardware. All right. So, what does compiler scheduling require? First thing it requires is a larger scheduling scope. The second thing it requires is enough registers. And the third thing it requires maybe is, you know, a little bit of what's called alias analysis. And we'll see what all of this stuff is. Each one of these things, we are sort of going to have to do in hardware. We're going to play the same tricks. Okay. So, what is larger scheduling scope? Say, my code was only doing A gets B plus C. Okay. So, this is the code that I have for A gets B plus C. So, I just cannot move any instruction around because, you know, I could change this load and this B2 load, change the order of the load. But now instead of, then instead of having a load you store because of R2, I'll have a R3, I'll have a load you store for R2. Okay. I can't move the store before this add. Okay. That's wrong execution. There's a true dependence. So, there isn't much I can do over here. So, what I had over here is I had two different computations. Much larger piece of code. Where I had some independent instructions I could move around. All right. Okay. The second thing I need to do is I need to have enough registers to hold onto values that are alive that I'm going to need for the computation. All right. So, let's go to this computation over here. Okay. This load is bringing a value that I'm going to need for the computation. I'm going to put it in R2. That's one live value. This other load is bringing another value putting in an R3. That's another live value. Okay. Then this add is writing and creating a new live value that I'm putting into R1. Okay. The stack pointer is another live value that all these different instructions are using. The number of live values in that piece of code, this piece of code that I have is only three. Maximum three at any given time. Okay. Why is it so? It's so because I had SP was one live value, R2 second live value, R3 third live value. Now I'm creating another live value, but I no longer need the values in R2 and R3. So at this point, I only have two live values, R1 and SP. Okay. So you're going to be a maximum of three live values in the execution of this code. If I have maximum three live values, I can keep them with only three register. Say I rearrange this code over here. Okay. I rearrange the code and I said, hey, you know what? I'm going to take this load and move it between this load and this end. And now I'm going to get rid of this load you saw. Okay. And I'm going to move this store between this load and store that I was doing and I'll get rid of that. Okay. And that's what I do, but I am going to have incorrect code over here. Why do I have incorrect code over here and why was the previous code correct? In this code, I'm using only three registers, R1, R2, and SP. You know, okay, R1, R2, and SP. Okay. But here now I have one live value, SP is one live value, this load, second live value, this load, third live value, this load, fourth live value. And this ad uses two of those live values, but I have four live values and I only have three registers. Okay, R1, R2, and SP. So then I cannot write code correctly with only three registers because I have more than three live values. So I need more registers. Okay. And if this code was correct because I use SP1, R2, R3, R5, R6, R4, many more than four like that are registers. Okay. So we're going to need more registers to avoid these right after read violations. Are you with me on this? The next thing I need in general is what is called alias analysis. So again, what I did was, okay, what I did was I moved this load between this load and ad. Or in other words, I moved it before this store instruction. Okay. And then I further moved that store over here to execute even after this load instruction. Okay. That is funny. If this load does not read the value of this store. Okay. And very similarly, this store does not write a value that this load uses. Okay. So this store is writing into an offset of zero from SP. This load is reading from offset, address offset zero from R8. So basically what I have to try and determine whether SP and R8 contain the same value. If they do, then these loads and stores are the same address and I cannot carry on that movement. Okay. Any questions about this? So, you know, this is the kind of stuff that compilers have to do to be able to move. And when we get to talk about the IA64, the kind of tricks that they play, you know, they can't always guarantee it and then there's speculation. We talk about speculation is and we'll play those tricks in hardware we talk. Okay. The next dependence is the write after write dependence. So where two instructions are writing into the same register. The compiler cannot reorder this all to execute before this add. Sorry. Cannot reorder this all to execute before this subtract because in that case, the subtract would get the wrong way. There is a, okay, the subtract would get the wrong way. I also can't order, you know, this add to execute after this or because any instruction occurring after the or needs the result of the or in register R1, not the result of this add in register R1. Okay. So reordering would leave the wrong value in R1 and later instruction would get the wrong value. However, notice, this is a totally artificial dependence. If instead of R1, I had used R10. There is no problem to reorder these instructions. Or in other words, if I used a different register name for this or, we'll get rid of this. And in fact, you know, the way given that if you have a certain number of registers, if I have a certain number of registers, I will use this artificial register renaming to map that name to a different register. So if I have this in order pipeline that I talked about, five stage, everything is going through every stage, then I'm pretty much guaranteeing that all the registers are being, all the instructions are writing the registers in the order. So there is going to be no problem. There's no right after right hazard, even if I have right after right. However, it can happen with multi-cycle operations, even with, you know, reasonable simple pipelines over here. And, or, you know, which happens when you have a floating point operation or a cache list. And let us see an example of that. Okay. So say I have a divide instruction, which is now going through a pipeline, start it out, fetch, decode, and then they went off into different pipelines over here. The divide was taking five block cycles. Okay. Then the store was, you know, doing whatever, and then the ad, a floating point ad photographed that, a floating point ad was taking two block cycles. Okay. And the divide in this ad are writing into F2, and the store is reading F2. Okay. So what happens is, the divide is goes through mainly on its way without being bothered by anyone, and ends up writing into F2 in block cycle way. The store, you know, the store starts to fetch in block cycle two, and it's now going to stall. Okay. Because it cannot go into the mem stage until block cycle three. Okay. Until the value is ready. Okay. And then there's an ad, which is not using the value of either one of these. It's fetching block cycles three, goes off into this different pipeline over here, goes off into this different pipeline over here. Okay. And where the, you know, the divide is off somewhere here, and then the store is in this pipeline over here. Okay. And, and now, it's ready to write its result in block cycle seven. Okay. Do I do that or not? Okay. So, what to do? First thing I could do is, I could stall this younger instruction, so that it writes back. It's simple, but, you know, you can actually, you know, you're stalling, and you can have these cascaded stalls that are happening. So, you be clever. You say, hey, look, you know what? Any instruction after this ad instruction is going to use the value of this F2. Why should I even bother writing this F2? As long as I bypass this store instruction, I'm done. You know, don't even bother writing F2 register file. Hey, I'm saving the energy of writing something into the register file too. Win, win, win. Okay. So, what happens now if the divide instruction calls an exception? Divide what? Okay. Well, if that happens, you say, that code, why didn't you do the check to see where the zero before you tried to do the divide? Okay. I can't help you. Then I'm not recovering from that code. It's okay. You don't have to recover from that code necessarily. Okay. You know, why are you bothering the hardware guys? The software guys can't get your act together. Okay. But, a store instruction could cause a page fault. Okay. And why do you have a page fault? Because the hardware guys can get that act together and give you lots of fast memory that you put everything in memory. Okay. So, you know, that brings up the other important issue. Handling interrupts and exceptions. How do we handle interrupts and exceptions in a pipeline? So, an interrupt, you all know the difference between an interrupt and an exception. Okay. Interrupt is an external event that's coming You see an interrupt, you can say, okay, I see you. I'm going to just wait a while till I'm fine. And then I'll recognize the interrupt. No big deal. But an exception is an internal event caused by during the execution of the program or divide by zero, a page fault. Okay. Illegal. That you have to, you know, and you want to restart from it. Okay. You don't have to restart necessarily from a divide by zero page fault. You have to give the impression that never even happened. Okay. So, okay. What do you do? What do you do? You know, the one moment architecture and again, the software is assuming all the instructions are executed one at a time. Okay. So, if the store instruction created an exception and I want to go handle the exception for the store, you know, get the page in the memory, I can assume that all the instruction before the store completed and none of the instructions after the store even started. They weren't even fetched. Okay. So, you know, that is what is called a precise state and we want to be able to have a precise state or precise interrupt to figure out how to do that. That was a big innovation, you know, many years ago dealing with that and out of order execution. Okay. Pipeline doesn't have to execute the instructions here one at a time, but we have to give the external impression that's how it happened. So, you know, when we have an exception, we want to make it appear that the divide finished. Okay. If we have an exception for the page fault for the memory instruction and the store and the ad haven't even started. So, you know, what you're going to do is, you're going to flush to, you know, allow the divide to write back. Then you're going to flush the store and add as if they never happened. Handle the page fault and then come back and restart the program from the store. Okay. How do we flush the instruction? Clear out the latches. The instruction vanishes. That's what we're going to use to flush the instructions. Okay. But, what we also have to do is make sure that the later instructions, you know, you have a precise state of all the registers. Okay. So if this add instruction has already written back into a register file, you somehow have to undo that. It's complicated, but you'll see potentially, not in this case, but for more common cases. Okay. How do we do that? Okay. And, you know, you could force in order write backs and we'll see other solutions. Things get even more complicated if now two instructions are causing an exception. Okay. So there's, you know, I have a divide store, divide, I could have a divide by zero by this divide and a page four from this store. Okay. This one is recognized, is seen before, happens before this instruction, this exception over here, but this instruction is later. Okay. Again, what I want to be able to do is if I want to give the impression that, you know, things, the instructions are happening one at a time, I must also recognize the exceptions in order. Okay. So interrupts can get very, very nasty. Okay. And so, you know, like, you know, the early alpha processor, in fact, in fact, even the, you know, the early IBM auto-model implementation and so on. Okay. They did not bother implementing, the IBM guys did not even bother implementing precise interrupts. They didn't know how to do techniques for that. And it's like, hey, you know, write your code properly. You guys don't get in that situation. And which is fine. There were like 15 people who ever wrote code for that machine or whatever. Okay. And to tell those people do a good job or, you know, whatever. Some of the alpha processors, okay, initially they considered it so difficult that they said, you know, we aren't even going to support precise interrupts for floating point code. You know, why are you getting an arithmetic overflow for the code? Because your code, you don't do the right checks with the code. Why are you getting a divide by zero? Blame it on the software guy. The software guy said, no. I know, you know, you deal with it, if you want. Okay. And so, you know, later on we will see that exceptions are not going to be rare. They are going to be the norm. In fact, we do an execution model where we say, hey, I'm going to predict the branch is going to this way. If I was wrong, it's an exception. Deal with it. Okay. Give me a precise state. So, you know, precise state is going to be, you know, one of the bread and butter things that we're going to have to deal with. Okay. Very quick. I'm just going to go through these two more slides. I think I have a few more minutes. Okay. So, right after read hazards, where an instruction is reading a value that a later instruction is writing, again, you know, what you can, solve a right after read hazard simply, it's an artificial. If I used a different register as an output for the later instruction, I would not have that. Or I rename this register to something. You figure out how to do that. Again, it can't happen in a simple in-order pipeline because you read the instruction in the decode stage. Okay. And in fact, by the time this instruction writes into R2, the previous instruction that reads R2 has already left the pipeline. It's gone. It's not in the, you know, the hazard can only happen if both the instructions are in flight at the same time. Okay. So, just like we have with registers, we can also have read after write, write after read, and write after write hazards when you are reading memory locations. Sorry. We can have dependencies that exist through memory. These dependencies that exist through memory do not become hazards in our simple pipeline that we've talked about in-order pipeline. Why so? Because all the instructions are going to the pipeline in-order, and they're only accessing the memory at the same stage. Okay. And, you know, and, you know, at the same time. Hazards happen for registers because the reads happen much earlier in the pipeline. Okay. Okay. So, that's the easy stuff. Now we have these pesky things called control instructions, branches. And, you know, what you must, for branches, you come to a branch that's conditional, you either fetch this set of instructions or this set of instructions, you don't know which. Okay. So, you have to know the outcome of the branch instruction to figure out what is the correct instruction to fetch. So, you know, in a normal pipeline, if you're just doing fetch detail and so on like that, the branch outcome of the branch is not known to later in the pipeline, somewhere in the middle of the pipeline. Okay. So, you know, how do I fetch instructions if I don't know where I'm fetching instructions from? So I have these control hazards. Okay. Let me take a very simple, I'll stop here because you'll come back in a second. Any questions? Okay. See you Friday then.
