Title: 752_Lec13
Source file: 752_Lec13.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

the add, integer add instruction. And so you're going to allocate a reservation here. Then you would go to the map table. The map table, R1, is clear. So you copy over the value R1 over here. R1 over here. Okay, the contents of R1 over here. And now you're going to also, the destination register is also R1. So you'll go now and set the tag of R1 in the map table to be the reorder buffer entry number four. Okay, yeah. T1 and T2 means the values you have, V1 and V2 correspond to the values you are going to read, right? No, no, no. T1 and T2, sorry. V1 and V2 are the actual values. T1 and T2 are the tags corresponding to the registers for those values, the two source registers. So this store word doesn't write, right? So why does it have a ROV3 in T? Store does not write. Why does it have this ROV3 entry in T? We do agree that the ROV entry for this is three, right? I'm showing the stores over here, okay, in the tag. The store's destination is memory, if you will. When we talk to the load, when you see the load store queue, okay, we will see the importance of the ROV entry for that store. Because what's going to happen is that, to give you a preview, is that you will be searching the loads and stores in certain ranges, okay, and then this is the, when this ROV entry is ready to free, you will free also the corresponding store queue entry, or when that is ready to retire. Thank you for asking that. Other questions? Okay, clock cycle five, now this load is at the head of the reorder buffer, and it's ready to retire. Okay, no exceptions. Okay, so it retires, so you write the value of F1 into the register file, okay? Multiply proceeds to execute so you can free that reservation station. This add is ready to issue over here in C5, okay? And now that you've dispatched this load, so you allocate this reservation station for the load over here, okay? And then you, you know, again, you go to the map table with R1, it's getting the tag of reorder buffer entry number two. You go to the map table with F1, and you set the tag of F1 to be reorder buffer entry number, okay? Clock cycle six, you know, this load has gone, okay, it's retired. This multiply hasn't completed, so it cannot retire, okay? This add immediate starts to execute, you know, and so you can free that reservation station, and now you can dispatch the multiply to the tail to reorder buffer entry number six, and allocate a reservation station, and so the destination is reorder buffer entry six. For F0, you get the value from the register file because the tag is zero. For F1, there is a tag of reorder buffer entry number five, you copy over that tag over here. Clock cycle seven, this add completes, so what comes out of the Commodore data bus is the value for register R1, and the tag is reorder buffer entry number four. You match the tags in the reservation stations, you get a match for this load instruction over here, so you copy over the value and set, you know, and then basically now you set that, you know, the value is ready, okay? This tag also matches the map table, okay, and of course you write R1 into the reorder buffer entry number four, okay? And then this tag matches the map table, so you set the ready and reorder buffer entry to be one. You cannot dispatch it, why so? Because there is no free reservation station because the previous store occupying that reservation station has not executed, okay, has not reached the execute stage. Clock cycle eight, this multiply completes, when this multiply completes, out of the reorder on the Commodore data bus comes the value for F2, register F2, and tag reorder buffer entry number two, you write F2 into reorder buffer entry number two, broadcast this tag to the reservation stations, match it, so you snarf the value into this value field of the reservation station, so you grab that, okay? And now then also you try and look for a matching reorder buffer entry number two over here, okay? There is no match. So you don't do anything in the map table over here. And this load proceeds to execute, so you free this reservation station for the load over here, okay? Now this ad completed in clock cycle seven. However, you know, there is nothing more you can do about it in clock cycle eight because it is not at the head of the reorder buffer, okay? So this ad cannot retire because it's not at the head of the reorder buffer. It can only retire when it gets to the head of the reorder buffer, all right? Clock cycle nine, this is where we see all the different stages are active at the same time. Clock cycle nine, okay, at the end of clock cycle eight, this multiply has completed, okay? It has completed, is the multiplies at the head of the, or let me put it, say it a different way. The instruction at the head of the reorder buffer has completed without any exception. So in clock cycle nine, you can retire that. You can retire this multiply, okay? This store then, now, sorry, at the end of clock cycle eight that value corresponding to F2 and tag ROV2 also was broadcast and woke up this store over here. So the store issued, if you will, in clock cycle eight. And it could proceed to effectively the execute part of it, which is it will do stuff in the load store queue. We will see what that is next class, okay? And so it can proceed to execute over here. This load is going to complete execution in clock cycle nine. So the tag reorder buffer entry five and the value for F1 come out in the common data bus. F1 gets written into the reorder buffer. This tag gets broadcast and it matches this entry over here. So you, you know, clear that entry and grab the value of F1 of the common data bus. So now this multiply has both F0 and F1 ready and so it can issue, okay? And this store now has started execution so you can free that reservation station and allocate it to this store over here, okay? And this store, again, what you'll do is you'll go to the, you know, map table with R1 and get reorder buffer entry number four, okay? And then it'll go to, for F2 and get reorder buffer entry number six as the tag. And when it gets to reorder buffer with reorder buffer entry number four and the ready in reorder buffer bit is set, that means the value for R1 is in the reorder buffer. It is ready in the reorder buffer at entry number four. So you will get this value of R1 from the reorder buffer entry number four and copy it to this value field over here. Are you with me on that? Any questions? Okay. Clock cycle then. This store proceeds to complete, okay? And, you know, this multiply proceeds to execute and so you can free this reservation station over here. Clock cycle seven. You can retire the store, okay? And, you know, the other is, you know, the load is still waiting to retire. Add is still waiting to retire but the multiply is still going to be executing in clock cycle 11, okay? And then you can finish up the rest. Questions? Okay, let's hold on to that thought for a while, okay? So the whole point of the reorder buffer is to maintain a precise state, okay? And how do you make that work? It's really very, very simple actually, okay? What you do is you wait until the last good instruction retires and the first bad instruction is at the head of the reorder buffer, okay? And then you just zero everything out. You clear all the reorder buffer, clear the reservation stations, clear the map table, okay? And start them again. Why does this work? This works because if I have a zero in a reorder buffer reservation station, it's empty. Nothing there. Importantly, if the tag is zero in the map table, that means that the register, corresponding register has the latest correct value, all right? So when now in clock cycle nine, say this store had a page fault. We'll get to TLV stuff later on, all right? Say it had a page fault. If it had a page fault, now take a look at what that, you know, what the situation over here is. The situation over here is all the instructions before this instruction have retired, which means that any register that this previous instruction was going to write to has been written in the register file, okay? Further, no instruction at the store, including the store, has retired, which means none of their destination registers have been written into the register file, okay? So if I just zero out the reservation stations and further and further, okay? What is there in the map table? The tags in the map table correspond to tags, correspond to instructions that are still in the reorder buffer that are going to write to that register. If an instruction has already written into the register and no other instruction is going to be writing the register, the tag is zero, okay? So if I simply wipe out all these tags over here, where are all these tags? That's an indicator that hey, the registers have the correct value, which is they have the value of the instructions that occurred before the instruction at the head of the reorder buffer. That had been written by those. And no, once I clear these tags out, there is no other instruction after this that's going to be writing into those, okay? So I just cleared everything out and I'm done. Start all over. After the operating system fixes a page full. Now you asked about a TLB miss. So if there's a hardware walker of a TLB miss handler, you can actually allow it to proceed in parallel with, you don't have to clear out all these instructions later on. As far as I understand, basically what my understanding is is that you have a base address which corresponds to where your page table is and then you have hardware mapper or hardware walker will go there and do those things, right? It will perform what usually older OSs do. We talked about how we handle page faults later on, how the page table structure is and how you have to walk through the page table. Okay. And you can do that with a software miss handler. Okay. And these days, even if you have a software miss handler, which mostly you have hardware miss handlers, you have to handle the miss TLB miss in the hardware. So if you have a piece of hardware, you know, you say a piece of hardware does this thing, the store instructions still waiting at the head of the reorder buffer. Okay. And the instructions that are there elsewhere, they continue doing what they are doing. So you're overlapping that hardware miss handler. Okay. It does get a little complicated, okay, because what it does, et cetera, et cetera. Alternatively, also, if you have, if you're handling this miss handler in software, okay. Now, you know, what we have so far talked about is this very simple machine, one thing and something like that. You can actually maybe spawn a new little thread to handle that in the hardware, you know, and run it and then it comes back. There's stuff you have to handle that gets a little complicated because we have to share control registers and sharing control registers get a little more complicated. But the TLB miss handler occurs much more frequently than a baseball. So people have, you know, figured out how to not make it hurt that much. It still hurts. Okay. But by trying to not completely flush out the machine when you have a TLB miss handler. Page 40, pretty much after. My second, like, it's, what if we get a bad instruction exception and, but there is the common data bus is still valid. We never actually zero out the common data bus at any, like, rate. So what, like, can there be a base such that while you were flushing out the ROP, you accidentally load something back? No, common data bus. So we flush out sequential logic where state stays. Why is that? State doesn't stay. Okay. You know, I mean, when I say you're pulling stuff out from common data bus and so on like that, you're just clearing all the logic. It's not going to be doing anything. You're basically, you know, any sequential logic state that stays is what you have to clean out. So yeah, we could just disable the write control on the register file if we are worried about that resolution for that one clock. When you are clearing something out, you just clear it out. Okay. Zero it out. You're writing zero. That's what you're doing. Okay. So, you know, we go through cycle 12 and you just restart all over again. No big deal. So, you know, what is the cost of handling a precise state? Really, it's, you know, the whole point of, you know, when we did this is like, look, the reorder buffer can delay the write and aggravate latencies. But then, hey, when out of order, you can overlap the latencies and delay all of that. So, you know, as long as you have a big enough reorder buffer and you're not stalling for the reorder buffer, okay, the reorder buffer is not really hindering performance. And in fact, if by freeing up, allowing you to free up reservation stations earlier than you could, you can actually get by with smaller number of reservation stations. Alternatively, you're not going to be stalling for reservation stations for the same number. You're going to be stalling less with the reorder buffer and the same number of reservation stations. But if the reorder buffer is too small, then, you know, it becomes an issue. Now, you know, how big is it you want to make a reorder buffer? That's the question. So, you want it to be as big as as many instructions that you're going to have in flight at any given time, okay? So, what we've been talking about is, hey, you know, between dispatch and write back, if we have some number of pipeline stages, each one of them is doing n instructions, then you want to be at least number of entries in the reorder buffer to be, you know, the how many instructions I'm doing per cycle times the number of pipeline stages between dispatch and write back, okay? Now, one of the duties of these out of order machines is that, you know, is you design your L1 caches, you know, but they don't, I mean, they mess up frequently. And then you have a second level cache on chip, okay, which may be 10, 15 cycles, okay? So, these machines designed well can actually tolerate latencies of an L2 cache access. Why so? Because what I would do now, so say I was doing four white, and I had four stages between, you know, dispatch and write back, and one of those was a one cycle cache hit. So I'd have 16 entries in the reorder buffer, okay? Now, say I instead had like 100 entries in the reorder buffer, so when a load instruction had a cache miss and it took 15 cycles, it was sitting in the reorder buffer for 15 cycles, I could keep porting other instructions over there, okay, into the reorder buffer. So, you know, again, back with the unblocked calculation, if the load miss was 15 cycles and I was doing four instructions at a time, then in 15 cycles I would basically be issuing 60 instructions. So my reorder buffer is more, and so those, you know, dispatching, sorry, not dispatching, dispatching 60 instructions, touching and dispatching them into the backend, if you will, okay, so my reorder buffer is bigger than that, then I'm not going to stall. The front end is just going to keep fetching instructions that I can dispatch, okay? And, you know, so, you know, at least twice the L2 hit latency that people do, but then people get greedy and say, look, man, I'm putting all this, if I get my branch prediction right, okay, then I can tolerate longer latencies, I can even start talking about L2 misses and maybe L3 hit miss latencies. Okay, so, you know, when you see these reorder buffers on 600 instructions, that's what they are in a sense, saying, hey, you know, I have enough resources to put in the reorder buffer, why don't I just spend resources on getting a good branch predictor so I can just keep filling the 600 entry reorder buffer and that will allow me to tolerate even L2 misses. Was this length of reorder buffer a significant factor in why, like, you had once said that you had basically wanted people to move to non-blocking cases with the little slot, so was this also a factor in having, like, cases that serve consequences even if they hit numbers? So we'll get to, we'll talk about this at the caches, but look, so very simply, very simply, okay, so where are we now? Where are we? Okay, where we are at is the following. Let's go to the first, okay, so, you know, what is it we want to do is we want to do the instruction recycle, and the latencies are getting bigger, maybe cache misses and so on like that, okay, so what you want to do is you want to have a large instruction window to tolerate latencies, tolerate the read off write hazards, and so then you need to be able to predict branches, okay, but then, now, you have to basically allow the execution of the instructions to overlap each other. If one in every six instructions is a load instruction, then you have to allow loads to overlap each other. If all loads hit in the cache, okay, fine, okay, who cares? Okay, but they don't, so then loads miss, so when a load misses, what do you do? Stop? No, you allow a load of a miss a missable load, you'd be able to handle a miss overlap the missable load with other instructions, other non-load instructions, okay, then it should be fairly obvious after that, then you'd also, hey, if I only do non-load instructions, there are only like three or four every load instructions, so, you know, if I'm going to take a 10 cycle miss latency, even if I'm doing only one instruction at a time, I have to overlap that miss and other load instructions, okay, and okay, then it is, you overlap the do those loads hit, like as good as they hit, but then there's reality, that they miss, so you have to overlap misses with each other. This is a very, this is, this is, you know, very simple queuing and, you know, we talk about Little's Law, very simple Little's Law argument is what you have to do. Unfortunately, people don't, you know, it's like, what's the saying, common sense and not that common? Little's Law is common sense. Unfortunately, many times it's not that common in systems design, so, we'll talk about non-locking catches later on. Other questions? Yeah, so how do branches fit into this? They get a reservation station and they... So, the branch unit, yes, you basically, how do branches fit into this? First thing, you go and speculate, okay, on what do you speculate on branch direction and get the target address of the branch. You do it even before that, and now the branches will get a slot, okay, and a branch is going to execute. Figure out if the direction is taken. Calculate the target to see if the target is correct. If it's not, it essentially stalls, does the same thing that we did with the other. If it's not, boom, wipe it up and start. And we talk about now, you know, wiping out, restarting for different things, yeah. Should we wait for the, like, if we have a regular address generation, that should be done by one year before, maybe two. Or three or four, yeah. Should we wait until the branch actually goes to the head of the ROV? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, yes, like, hey, bad branch, flush it off. So, you know, you, so the, you have the notion of the branch is resolved. The branch is resolved when you calculate the target address. And you calculate the branch condition. And you know what you're, what you're predicted? You do what the branch is going to work out and you see if they're the same. So, if they're the same with the branch that resolved, you're good. If not, if you waited for this branch to, you know, to reach the head of the ROV buffer, it's too late. So, you basically have to, you know, actually let other instructions before the branch keep going, but then just flush after that point on the ROV buffer, clear out from that branch point everything the ROV buffer will start. The ones before that still could have been executed. As long as you can make sure they are not, you know. This is where I think the MIPS ISAB has not used it very much. No, it's more than that. No, a lot of the issue has to do with, you know, you're going to have to, you know, where do you come back in the control? Okay. And what do you have to, when you have to predict, you know, when you predict a branch is, you know, there's an instruction that delays a lot, which is going to be executed when the branch is bigger than or taken. You have to remember all of that. That's quite complicated. Okay. So, you know, I mean, when out of order, you know, when we proposed this design many years ago, when people didn't have any idea what they were. So, the first processors, you know, were based on this PC standard design. Okay? And, you know, these days, you know, there are still several, in a sense, that uses, but what happens is people then try and take mixes of both, if you will. Okay? But it went away for a while. And why did it go away? Okay? We'll see that. We'll see the alternative. And then we'll see the alternative has a big plus, but it has a huge minus too. Okay? And we'll see what that is. So, the problem with the PC style is the following. Okay? There's too much value movement. So, we have the register file. We are copying values from the register file into the reservation stations. From the reservation stations, they go to the functional unit. From the functional unit, they go and get written in the reorder buffer. From the reorder buffer, they go into the register file, but they could also be copied over to the reservation stations. So, this copying over to the reservation station is actually really sort of the issue. Okay? And so, they have multi-multiple inputs. So, this multiplexer input over here, you know, is either from the register file now or from the common data bus or from the reorder buffer. And that ends up, you know, potentially slowing the clock a little bit. Alternatively, in the MIPS R10 style, this is going to be more of a damasulo versus the scoreboard kind of situation. In the scoreboard, values are only going in the register file and they were going from the register file to the functional units. So, you're going to have one physical register file that holds all the data. So, there is no copy from reorder buffer to the register file, et cetera. Okay? And the register files are close to the functional unit, so it's a small, fast data band. The reservation stations and the reorder buffer are on the side and they are going to be used mainly to do the, or only to do the control and the tagging. Okay? So, we'll see in gory detail what this means. So, you know, there is no architectural register file. The physical register file holds all the values. The number of values that you have over here that you want to hold is how many registers are there in your architectural register file plus how many values are instructions that are in flight that are producing. And the instructions that are in flight are the instructions in the reorder buffer. Okay? So, I have a 32 register and I have 40 instructions in flight. I need to have, you know, 72 plus physical registers. I'm going to see all the architectural registers are mapped to physical register. Okay? So, if I get out and I went to the machine with a clean state, okay? R0 could be in P13. And next time I went to it in a clean state, R0 could be in P9. Okay? Even though no other instructions are executing at any given time. Okay? So, we're going to map the architectural register to physical registers. And it's a physical register file that the multiple storage is going to allow us to remove these hazards. And the physical registers are really taking the place of the reservation station copies. So, rather than keep around copies of the register in these reservation stations, I'm in a sense keeping copies of the register in different physical registers. Okay? Are you with me in this conceptually? We'll see in detail exactly what happens. So, there's a fundamental change in the map table. Mappings cannot be zero because there is no architectural register file. Okay? So, a register, a physical register, sorry, a architectural register, there are as many map table entries as there are architectural registers. Each mapping, an entry for each architect of register is going to be non-zero because it has to be there in some physical register, which is non-zero. And you're going to have a free list. The free list is going to keep track of unallocated physical registers. And we're going to use a reorder buffer to return physical registers to this free list. So, another true renaming example. So, let's go back to this renaming example that we had a couple of few lectures ago. So, we had three architectural register names, R1, R2, R3, and then there were, you know, eight different physical register locations, seven different physical register locations. Originally, R1 was mapped to 11, R2 was mapped to 12, and R3 mapped to 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17. Okay? And now, I did this map, remapping and renaming, took, you know, register from the free list for the destination, and mapped the destination to the register that I got from the free list. And this is what happens over here. Okay? Now, what do I do for the next instruction? Next instruction does not have any register in the free list to work with. So, we are out of free list location. What really the question is, is, okay, hey, at some point, a physical register that I allocated, I need to free up, somehow. Okay? So far, so good? Let's step back a little bit. So, an instruction is writing into a register. Okay? And I'm going to give some place where the value that is going to go in that register is going to sit. Okay? You know, in your good old, you know, doing nothing fancy, the value that sits in the register file. Okay? And now, when we had Tamasulo algorithm, when we had the scoreboard algorithm, the value was only sitting in the register file. When we had the Tamasulo algorithm, the value could be in the register file, the value could be in the reservation station. When we had the B6, the value could be in the register file, it could be in the reservation station, it could be in the reorder buffer. Okay? At some point, I need to make the decision that, you know, I put a value somewhere in location X, it could be in register, it could be in map table, sorry, in reservation station, reorder buffer. I no longer need that value. Okay? When I no longer need that value, then some other value could be put in that storage location. Okay? So, when do I no longer need the value that an instruction has created? I no longer need the value that an instruction has created in writing into R3. When any instruction that is going to ever use that value of R3 is done, then they no longer need that value. I can be sure of that. Okay? When I can be sure that no other instruction is going to need the value that is sitting somewhere in some storage, I can free that storage. Otherwise, I cannot, because if there is any chance that an instruction is going to need that value, I have to keep that value around. Okay? You're fine with the concept? Okay. So, what happens in the physical register? So, you know, when I did, you know, this precise state over here is all the values of the prior instructions went into the register file. So, if I ever cleared all these instructions, then I could go and get the value from the register file. Okay? The architectural registers. But in this R10 case file architecture, there is no architectural register file to copy the value to. In the P6, we copied it. We had it in the re-article buffer, and then we copied it back to the architectural register file when the instruction retired. Okay? So, you cannot free the physical register when the instruction retires. When I go back to the example, it will come clear why you cannot do that. Okay? But what you can do is you can free the value when you are sure that no other instruction is ever going to read that value. Okay? And that you can be sure of is that you can be sure that no other instruction is going to read that value when any instruction that would read that value as retired. Okay? Are you with me on this? So, you can free the physical register that was previously mapped to the same logical register. This will come clear as I take the example. So, here are now, you know, the same example over here, and this, you know, add this, you know, R1 got mapped to 14, you know, R3 got mapped to 15, and so on. Okay? Now, let me just take a look at, say, this multiply instruction. Okay? This multiply instruction destination is going to be mapped to R1, and that R1 is mapped, you know, I mapped it to 16 over here. Okay? And, sorry. Let me go back to this add instruction. Okay? So, say this add instruction retires. Okay? This add instruction retires, and I have these instructions in the machine, and can I free physical register 14? Okay? What happens if I free physical register 14? Physical register 14 is free. Something else gets written to it. Who knows? Okay? And, you know, say this subtract had caused some exception, and this physical register 14 got free, and now I came back and restarted from the subtract, and I go look for 14. It's gone. So, I cannot free 14, which is the destination that this add, until I can be sure that no other instruction is going to need 14. What I can be sure of is the following. When I get to this add instruction, this add instruction is ready to retire, means all the previous instructions have retired. Okay? And, R1, which got mapped to 14, was previously mapped to 11. So, when this add retires, I can be sure that all previous instructions, which were going to read R1 from physical register 14, have retired. Okay? Which means there is no other instruction that's going to read the value that was mapped to physical register 11, which means I can free physical register 11. Okay? Very similarly, when subtract retires, okay, I can free the register that was previously mapped to R3, that was 13. When multiply retires, I can free whatever register was previously mapped to R1, which is 14. When divide retires, I can free whatever physical register was previously marked to R2, which is 12. Are you with me on this? You free the physical register that was previously mapped to the destination, that the destination register was previously mapped to when that instruction retires. You do not free the physical register that the destination is currently mapped to, because there are later instructions that could be using that value. Are you with me on this? Okay, now let us take a look at the R10k. Okay, so we have a different type of tag again. You know, in Tomasulo, they have a reservation station number was the tag. P6, the ROB entry number was the tag. In R10k, the physical register number is the tag. In the reorder buffer, you do not have values. You have the tag for the physical register corresponding to the instruction's logical output, and then you also have the tag for the physical register that was previously mapped to the instruction's logical output. The reservation stations do not have any values. The values are only in the physical register files. For the register, the reservation stations have tags for the inputs and tags for the output. The map table always has a non-zero tag, which is the physical register number, and it also has a ready bit to indicate whether the value is there in that physical register. All right? And then we have a free list of physical register numbers. There are no values in the reorder buffer reservation stations or on the common data bus. Values don't come out in the common data bus. Values are only going from register to functional unit. What's coming out in the common data bus is tags, and there's no values in the reservation stations, no values in the reorder buffer. So, you know, to start out with, you know, the reorder buffer is empty. Reservation stations are empty. There are no values anywhere. But the map table is never empty. It always has a mapping to a physical register, and then we have a free list of some kind. So, we'll work with this. So, the pipeline is, again, fetch, dispatch, issue, execute, complete, write back, or retire, sorry, retire. In dispatch, you check to see if you have a structural hazard, either for a reservation station or a reorder buffer entry, or load store queue, or your autophysical registers. If you have a structural hazard, you stall. Otherwise, you allocate the reservation station, reorder buffer, and load store entries, and a new physical register. How do you allocate a new physical register? You get a new physical register from the free list. Okay? And then what you do is you record the previously mapped physical register into the reorder buffer entry allocated to that instruction. Execute, nothing interesting. You issue when both the tags in the reservation station have their ready bits set. Okay? Indicating the values there in that physical register. And then you execute. When you complete, you simply write the result. When you complete, you write the result into the corresponding physical register. Okay? And you broadcast the tag. You broadcast the tag to wake up waiting instructions. For retire, if the instruction of the head of the reorder buffer applies, you handle the exceptions. Then, when you retire, you store the load store queue entries. And then you use the entries of the reorder buffer to free put this old physical register back into the free list. You allocate an entry at the tail of the reorder buffer. You have a free list. You allocate like even in a store where you're not going to be, you always allocate a register even if the instructions have a destination. No, not for it. We'll talk a little bit about it, but a store, you can only let go into the data cache when the store reaches the head of the reorder buffer, even if it's not doing any of this other stuff. Is the old value enough for us to handle the exceptions? We'll see that. We'll see that. Handling exceptions So what do you when you say register file, what are you meaning by a register file? So we have they exist in the register file because the pipeline diagram has the register file in between. So those are the registers that I know exist in the register file, but these registers the ones that we are going to use. Okay. So you have a bunch of storage that you're building some register storage. Now you have the architectural register file which is your R0, R1, R2, R3 which is there the instructions and that you build with that typical storage. You can build and register with an R0, R2, R51 and how you manage these registers some of them could be architectural, some of it could be physical if you will and actually different ones that will be architectural and physical will change at different times based on the map table. That is what we are doing over here. So it's just a bunch of types in the registers, like some special purpose registers. Nope, nope, nope. In this one you're just having a uniform set of registers. Okay. Uniform set of registers. Over here I could have 32 registers, I could have 70 registers, I could have 500 registers. Okay, whatever. They're the same, everything. What value goes in which register and what it corresponds to depends on how I manipulate the map table. Okay, so what do you do on dispatch? You go in to the map table, read the physical register tags for the two inputs. Okay. And then you go to the map table with the destination physical register. Take the tag of that physical register number and store it in the allocated reorder buffer entry, the T old field. Okay. You allocate a new physical register from the free list. Get that tag, copy it into the reservation station for the destination here, copy it into the reorder buffer entry over here, and write it into the map table for the destination. So read the physical register tags, store it in reservation stations. Read the previous register tag for the output register, store it in the reorder buffer, get a new physical register from the free list for the output register, store it in the reservation station reorder buffer in map table. When instruction completes, you broadcast the tag, which is basically the physical register number. Okay. You match it, you compare it against the tags of the reservation stations, set the ready-bets or the matching tags in the map table. And if the ready-bets for both inputs are set, that instruction can be issued. Then you also get the matching tag in the map table and set that output register ready-bet. When you retire, retire is very simple over here. What you do is you simply take the instruction at the head of the reorder buffer, the t old field, which is the physical register, you put it back on there. Let's work through the example. We still have ten minutes so we can get to the reasonable amount of it. Reorder buffer, reservation stations, map table, free list. Notice we started out with this situation where this was the mapping of F0 was mapped to physical register one and it was ready in the register file. F1 was mapped to two, ready in the register file. F2 was mapped to three, ready in the register file. R1 was mapped to four and was ready in physical register four. Free list had five, six, seven, and eight. We dispatch the load to the head of the reorder buffer and we allocate a reservation station for it. What do you do? You go to the map table with R1 and you go to map table with R1, you get PR4 plus. PR4 plus means the value is ready in physical register four for R1. You copy that tag over here. You go to the free list and get a physical register for the destination F1. That's PR5. You write in the t entry of the reorder buffer. You write in the t entry of the reservation station. Then you go to the map table and write F2 into PR5. Change the entry for F1 into PR5. You also go to a map table and get the previous mapping for that which is PR2 and put it in the reorder buffer. Load issues. You dispatch, multiply. When you dispatch, multiply, you will get a reservation station for it. Go to the map table. Tag for F0 is plus. Copy it here. Tag for F1 is PR5. You copy it over here. Notice the plus is not set here. Why so? It's not set here because it's the destination of the load which still hasn't been complete. You go to the map table with F2. F2 was PR3. You copy over PR3 into the old field over here. Go to the free list to get a physical register for the destination. That is PR6. You put PR6 in this field of the reorder buffer. You put PR6 in the destination tag of the reservation station. Then you go to the map table for entry F6 and put PR6 over there. Clock cycle three. Stores are not allocated physical registers but they get a reservation station. The load starts executing so you free that reservation station over there. The multiply cannot do anything yet. Clock cycle four. The load completes. When the load completes, it comes on the common data bus, the tag for that load, destination for the load, which is PR5. You compare PR5 against the tags in the reservation station. You see a match. You mark that to PR5 plus saying that physical register five is now ready in the physical register file. You also then went with the tag PR5 compared against the tags in the map table. Saw a match and set that to ready in the physical register file. Now value of F1 is there in physical register file. You dispatch this add and it gets dispatched to the tail of the reorder buffer, entry number four. This add goes to the map table for R1 input, gets PR7, allocates the reservation station. The map table for R1 has PR4 plus tag. You copy over the PR4 plus tag for the input of this add R1. Then you get a new physical register from the free list for the destination. You get PR7. Put that over here. Then you change the tag in the map table to be PR7. Clock cycle five. At the end of clock cycle four, load has completed. It's at the head of the reorder buffer so it can now retire. What happens when the load retires? You take the T old field, the physical register there, return it to the free list. Multiply got issued in clock cycle four. It starts executing in clock cycle five. You can free that reservation station in clock cycle five. This add gets issued in clock cycle five. You are ready now to dispatch this next load. This next load reads as input R1. You allocate this reservation station. The input tag is PR7. You put this as PR7. This load destination register is F1. You go to the map table F1. You got PR5 plus. That was the old T old. You copy that T old over here. PR5. You go to the free list for the destination for F1. You get PR8. You copy that over here. Then you make PR8 this destination register in the reservation station over here. Questions? That's a fair amount.
