Title: 752_Lec8
Source file: 752_Lec8.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

uh... you know they can also begin to begin with these you know what i would like to get and now let's take a look at the control has people who don't want to so i don't think here so and the branches you're going to come up You do not know what that address is, and you do not know if the branch is going to get taken. All right? So let us assume that the, you know, branch, typically default you assume that a branch is not taken because you can't even tell that it's a branch. What can you decode for it? When you fashion an instruction is basically a set of bits, you don't even know it's a branch. In the next cycle when the instruction is being decoded that you know is a branch, you're already fetching the next instruction. Okay? So in my simple five-stage pipeline that I have is say that the branch is taken, so I have an add instruction here, a branch is going to go to this target. This instruction flows through the pipeline like here. The branch instruction is flowing through the pipeline like here. In clock cycle three, it's decoded. Clock cycle four, you know whether the branch is going to get taken or not. When the execute stage you see what the, you know, branch condition is true, and you calculate the target address. In those two cycles, you know, you could have been executing instructions after that. And, you know, if you do not, then basically you have a, you know, a result. This is, this would be a hazard if you did not, if you executed this instruction before you knew that you had to execute it. Okay? So if I did a very simple back of the envelope calculation, 20% of the instructions are branches and 75% of the branches are taken, okay? For each branch that's taken, I'm going to have a two cycle penalty over here. So the, you know, if the base CPI is one for 20% of the instructions, 75% of the time I'm going to see a two cycle penalty. So that ends up being a CPI 1.3 that just the branches in the simple pipeline are going to cause a 30% slow down if I don't do something about it. Okay? So what all can I do? What, you know, the concept I want to try perhaps, one concept is to try and reduce the number of cycles that I have as a penalty. All right? So the first thing I can do is what is called a fast branch, where what you do is rather than having the branch resolve in the execute stage, have the branch resolve in the decode stage. Okay? You can do that if the work that you have to do to resolve the branch is very straightforward. Okay, so it's you aren't comparing two registers and seeing whether they're equal, not equal. Okay? What is very simple is reading a register to see if it's zero or one. Okay? So that is quite simple, you know, but, you know, doing a arithmetic, you know, doing a compare or whatever to figure out whether the branch is going to get taken is not that easy. Okay? Well, it's easy, but not the kind that you can sort of do trivially. So if you have a test that you compare to zero or equality, you know, then you can get the penalty down to one, but, you know, you can only have very simple comparisons. You just take a look to see if the register you read is zero or two things are equal, for example. Okay? But now as we saw when you're talking about instruction sets, you need these additional instructions if you have more complex tests so you have two separate instructions but the branch is simple. And now further, you know, we talked about bypass and you must also bypass the register values and do the decode stage. Okay? So the next concept is, you know, one of the smartest ideas that was developed which turned out to be the stupidest, smartest idea five years later. Okay? And let us see what this idea is. Okay? So let us say that I have a delayed branch, say I have a branch that's resolved and decode. So I only have one cycle of penalty over here. All right? So what if I had another instruction? What if the store instruction executed regardless of whether the branch was taken or not? Okay? In other words, what I did is I delayed the effect of the branch so the branch wasn't taken over here but the branch executed this instruction regardless if it was taken or not taken. Okay? Right? So instructions that are independent of the branch. So I'm gonna have the instruction slot after this branch is what's gonna be called the branch delay slot. Okay? So I can put in instructions that are independent of the branch in this branch delay slot. Okay? Preferably from before the branch or you can also, once you had this delayed branch, there was a whole body of work, how to fill this delay slot and what if you have multiple delay slots, you do slots three, four, five, whatever. If the pipeline was longer, if you had more mobile cycles. Okay? That's so great. So it works, okay? If I can fill those instructions over here, you know, if I can have a fast branch, so I need only one slot over here and I have to have one, fill in one delay slot of the instruction, I have no penalty for the branch. No cycles lost. Okay? No performance slots to begin. Okay? All is good. All right. So remember we talked about you have code and you want it to last for a few years after you write it. Preferably for a few decades, like, you know, IBM is going on. You want to have that compatibility. And so I'm doing this for a five-stage pipeline. Say I had a seven-stage pipeline. Now I have, you know, three cycles before the fashion, between the fashion and the execution. If I only put in one branch instruction over there, I'd still have those, still have those bubbles in the pipeline. Okay? More importantly, okay, let us say that what happens now is that this store instruction causes an exception. The store instruction is the instruction now in the branch delay slot, let's suppose. Okay? Say that causes a page fault. What do you do? You know how to handle page faults. Cause an exception, go to the page fault handler, operating system, takes days relatively to do its thing compared to the clock cycles that I have. You know, takes a million clock cycles. Comes back and says, I'm done, restart your program. And you go and restart this program from the store. Okay? And then, next instruction after the store is the instructions occurring sequentially after the store, which would be fine if this branch was not taken. But if the branch is taken, instruction you want to execute is from this target address. Okay? So now you have to remember, oh yeah, this store was in a branch delay slot, in a branch delay slot, in which case now I have to remember the branch and I have to go back to the branch and redo the branch and whatever. Are you with me on this? Okay? So it complicates the interrupt handling also. Okay? And, you know, and further, as we start getting to the out of order kind of stuff, this really makes, you know, like, okay, you know, which instruction, what are the dependencies and so on like that. It makes it quite complicated to deal with. Okay? But this is an example of, hey, now you're stuck with it. You have this in your instruction set. A branch is defined to be delayed. Okay? And, you know, the later architectures did away with this as fast as they could. But, you know, this is something that, you know, once you do something, very, seems very smart idea. I can get rid of all, you know, bubbles in the pipe, in my five-stage pipeline. Okay? But it comes back to bite you later on. Questions about a delayed branch? So, you know, in, yeah. But people that came to realize after a while is, look, there are so many unknown situations when you're executing the program. So you could either wait for them to be known, or you could carry out a speculative execution. You could speculate, carry out in a, you know, risky transaction, the chance of a profit. So you're gonna execute before all the parameters that determine the execution of an instruction, you know, with certainty. If I'm correct, I avoid the stalls and get a big performance win. If I'm wrong, I must abort the incorrect instructions and I must undo any incorrect changes or recover precisely. Okay? So the game really is the percentage of time I'm correct and the game that I get when I'm correct has to be greater than the percentage of times that I'm wrong and the penalty of being wrong. And once you have, you know, this concept of speculative execution, you know, we were trying to get people used to it as like, oh, you know what, do you wanna do this, whatever it is. But once you have, you buy the concept and then you have hardware support for that concept, then you can use all forms of speculative, lots of different forms of speculative execution that people see later on as we go by. Okay? All right. For control hazards, you're going to use control speculation. So, you know, the mechanic says, when we get to a branch, we are going to press the target of the branch and start fetching the instructions from the guest position and start actually, you know, processing them if you will. And when you execute the branch, you check to see if your guess was wrong, if you are correct, you just keep going as if nothing happened. Okay? If you're wrong, you have a misspeculation, then you're going to flush the misspeculated instructions. Okay? And so, you know, I mean, the game is to have the win be greater than the loss of the hit, all right? So for our five-stage pipeline, the game is going to be two cycles. The penalty really isn't going to be anything because, hey, you know, if I started executing the branch wrong, I just have the instruction incorrectly. Okay? Then I just have to clear out, you know, flush the instruction and you'll see just by clearing out the latches. I don't have to do anything else. Later on, we will see, you know, we may have to do something else that has to become more aggressive. Okay. So here's sort of an example of, you know, control speculation. So, you know, say there's the same piece of code and the branch is taken. Okay? So what I'm going to do is, again, you know, this add instruction goes to the pipeline, this branch is going through, and then, you know, since there's a piece of code, so this branch then jumps, either executes this store or skips over this store, the target is skipping over this store. Okay? Going to this add instruction. So this piece of code, you know, may, the add goes through like, yay, the branch is going through like, yay, and then, you know, it's clock cycle three, I'm fetching this store and clock, and then decoding it in clock cycle four and clock cycle, you know, four, I'm fetching this add instruction from this target, but these are now being speculatively executed because I do not know whether the branch is going to get taken or not taken. If the branch is going to be not taken, I'm going to do the store, if the branch is going to be taken, I'm going to, and then the add, if the branch is taken, I'm just going to do the add and not the store. Okay? So what do I do now if I'm wrong over here? In clock cycle four, the branch is taken, I know the branch is taken, here I predicted it was, I mean, you know, executing as if it were not taken, okay? None of these instructions after the branch have changed any state of the pipeline, you know, they have not written into a register or anything like that, so I don't have to undo any of that. All that I have to do is simply flush or squash these instructions that I'm executing speculatively and replace it no ops. And how do I do that? I do that by clearing the latches in the pipeline for those instructions. So basically what I do is I, you know, clear the information in the latch at the execute stage and clear the information with the latch in the, you know, fetch stage, sorry, the fetch in the decode stages, and so those instructions basically become no ops and then they flow through the pipeline with all zeros over here, okay? Okay, and then I start fetching in clock cycle five from the correct target over here. Any questions about this? Yeah. So this is a kind of a special example, but you already had that ad in the pipeline, right? This one here. Right, yeah. So, I mean, do they take, are there machines that take advantage of that? Like for these short jumps like this? So there's been a fair amount of research done on actually, you know, when you have, when branch re-converges and you have instructions that they control independent of the pipeline, how to perhaps save the work that you already did and not throw it away. It gets quite complicated, you know? In this one, it may not look that complicated, but when you start doing the full-blade branch friction, out-of-order execution, it gets reasonably complicated. And in fact, in fact, there have been proposals, some even implemented to actually, you know, you keep these batch slices of execution. They've gotten more important, especially for when you're dealing with memory operations. You do that right, and then you somehow try and get the work back of the entire slice of code, rather than redo it again. It's a little complicated. You can imagine. You know, I mean, so, you know, I mean, the thing about complexity is, you know, in any other stuff, is a lot of it is a points that issue, you know? The first time you see something new, it's downwards. But then after a while, it becomes much easier. Okay? And so, you know, it depends, again, what is the possible benefit of doing that versus how much you have to. Okay? Other questions? Yeah, we clocked it, like in the decode phase, and we are in the branch, right? We realize this is a branch. Yeah, we clocked it in the previous stages. We saved power. But then you are not doing any speculative execution. You're basically saying, oh, I know it's a branch, I'm gonna wait around till it's... But instead of putting in bubbles, which may still consume power at the last level and the further stages. Or in one of the previous classes, you had said that the mobile industry had just come up and people were like, we have a limited energy budget. What are you going to clock in? When we are in the decode phase, the control can basically clock in the PC thing and the IR thing. That's not what's causing the bubble. The bubble is that instruction that you execute indirectly going through the rest of the pipeline. It's not gonna go through the rest of the pipeline unless you clock all the latches. All right? Okay? So this instruction was incorrectly executed. You have to let it keep moving on so something new could enter the fetch stage. All right? Next thing, sort of one of the big ideas is what you're gonna do is, you know, dynamic branch prediction. And there are two parts of dynamic branch prediction. So typically a branch is gonna go one way or the other. Either it's gonna get taken or it's going to be not taken. And then the second part is, if the branch is taken, what is the power behind us? Okay? So we are going to have a branch direction predictor which applies to conditional branches because unconditional branches and jumps, they are always taken. There's no prediction over there. There's no direction over there. You know the direction. So you're gonna predict taken or not taken in a lot of effort is expanded in this. We will see some techniques. The second is that for any instruction, conditional branch, jump, procedure call, procedure return, you need to know what the target address is. And how can you get the target address or that control instruction so you can start fetching instructions from that target address? Okay? And that is what is called a branch target predictor. Okay? And this applies to all control references. It supplies the target PC and tells you that instruction is a branch active driver. Compared to this, it's easier but it also requires a lot of resources that we can see. And this is one of the biggest, you know, things, resource hogs going forward that a lot of people are working on these as a company, especially time to sort out. So let us see how we deal with target prediction. Okay? The first thing we use is what we're gonna call a branch target buffer. It's simply a cache of targets of branch instructions. All right? So there's a cache. These are entries in a cache. What I will do is I will use the PC of the instruction. I'm using it, I actually don't know whether it's a branch yet or not because I actually want to get the target address of the next instruction before I have even decoder to calculate the target address before perhaps even if I know if it's a branch instruction. Okay? So I'm gonna use the PC, find a matching entry, okay? And if there is a matching entry and the instruction is a branch, okay? Then the entry in the BTB is my target address. Okay? So just like a normal cache, you know, you get it, you use an address to get an entry in the cache and the entry is data. Okay? At that address here, you're using a PC value to get an entry and the entry is the target address for the branch instruction at that PC. Okay? It's a reasonably small cache. If you have a hit, then this is a control instruction and it's going to go to target PC if it's taken. If it's a miss, it's not a control instruction or a control instruction that you sort of haven't encountered before. So basically only entries over here are going to be for PCs for which you've created entries and those are going to be PCs or control instructions. Okay? You don't need much of a, do a full tag comparison, you can have aliasing, you can get an incorrect result. It doesn't matter because what you're going to be doing is fetching from an incorrect address and then you check to see whether later on you process that instruction and execute whether you got that out there in the right time. Okay? So, you know, I've had numbers for, you know, Pentium 4, 2K entries, 4A set associative. The size that you want at the BTV is going to be related to the number of branch instructions you have in your core working set. Okay? And these days, core working sets are getting bigger and bigger as people are writing in all sorts of libraries they call link something here, that end this way, you go there, whatever it is, you know, something moving. And core footprint gets bigger. So these BTV sites are getting bigger and bigger. You know? I mean, they are a process with 64K and BTVs. Okay? So these BTV entries get bigger and bigger. Now, why does a BTV work? Okay? Why does it work? So let us see why it works. Okay? It works because the target addresses of control instructions are generally stable. Okay? So let us look through the different types of control instructions that we have, see what the target addresses they would have and let us see if they are stable or not stable. Okay? So direct, as we know, means that the target is constant. Indirect means that the target is in a register. Okay? We have direct branches and indirect branches. Okay? So if the target is in the bits of an instruction, it is always going to be the same. If the target is in a register, so I have an indirect target, then it depends on what is in the register. Okay? So if I have a direct conditional branch, of course, you know, the target is always the same. Okay? If I have a direct call instruction, the target is always the same. I'm always going to the same, you know, function that I call and that's always going to be at the same DC. Okay? If I have a direct unconditional jump, where I'm going, you know, the bits are in the instruction, unconditionally I'm going there, target's always going to be the same. All right? What about indirect conditional branches? What were the indirect conditional branches? Okay, it's like, okay, I'm comparing two values to see if the branch is going to get taken or not taken and if the branch is taken, where it's going to go to is going to be, the address is going to be some register somewhere. We could have something like this. Generally, it's not a very useful instruction so people don't have it. Okay? What about indirect calls? Okay? An indirect call is, I'm going to call a function and the function I'm going to call, the starting address is going to be the register. And the way that, typically that, you know, this implementation comes around is what you have is, you have a table of pointers for different functions and then you're going to call these different functions by reading a, you know, and this address over here, it's going to get ported in a register. Okay? You're going to select one of these and then you're going to jump to the appropriate function by reading and then call that appropriate function by reading the picture in the right. Okay? There are two idioms, you know, programming idioms that result in indirect calls. One are dynamically linked functions. Okay, so normally you would standard, well, not normally, you know, when you've learned this stuff, linking, you are statically linking the call function by, you know the address of the call function, you know which function you're calling. Dynamically linked functions, you don't know which function you are calling statically, but dynamically that function gets linked, okay? You know, the starting address. And then of course, that does not change for, you know, that execution of the program. Okay, so even though the target address is not known statically, it does get known and it remains the same. Okay? Very similarly, you know, there are dynamically dispatched functions or virtual functions depending upon, hey, you know, you know, I have a generic function, you know, add or whatever it is and then based on, you know, whether I have integers or floating point or whatever it is, I'm calling different add functions, okay? And that is also pretty much going to be in that place in the code, you know, you're calling the floating point add function, if you will. It's always going to be the same. The target will be the same. Yeah. Isn't there another indirect unconditional jump, any far jump? Because there's a lot of risk. Say that again. Wouldn't an indirect unconditional jump be a far jump? There's a lot of risk I have to say that they don't have the full 64 bits address in their thing, so you can only jump a couple of megabytes. Yeah. So you would have to do it through a register. Typically what you do is you jump one place and then you jump somewhere else. Okay? That's what you do. So, okay. How about indirect unconditional jumps? So I'm always going to jump, but the target of where I'm going is in a register. Okay? So there are two idioms for this and one typically is if I have a switch construct and for each part of the switch or a case, I'm going to call a different function. Okay? In that case, it doesn't quite work unless you are always going to the same part of the switch. But you could be going to a different part, okay? So for that, it doesn't quite work, but these constructs where within a switch you have a bunch of function calls, okay? It's quite rare. The other is returns, okay? So what is that and what problem does that give us? So I say I have all of the function X over here and all of the same functions over there, all of the same function over here and here is my function X over here, okay? So when I call, I start up executing at the beginning of the function and the last instruction of the function is a return and this return is a typically, you know, what it is, jump to read the element, read the target address from a register, okay? So that is going to be a indirect, unconditional jump, that's a return. And now if the function is called from here, the target address is here, the function is called from here, the target address is over here, if the function is called from here, the target address is over here. So of course the target address is not really the same all the time, okay? So this BTB, which is working, which is working, it assumes that, hey, for this PC, the target address is always the same, it's not going to work for this return instruction. All right, are you with me on this? We can solve that problem with a return address stack. Okay, so what you do is when you have a call instruction, okay, you push the next PC onto a return address stack. All right, and now when you see a return instruction, you pop the top element of your return address stack, and that is your target PC, all right? Are you with me on this? So if your return address stack has an overflow, you're getting your target address 100% correctly, okay? So then the question comes is, okay, you know, how do I know to push this address on this return address stack, okay? I have to know this is a call instruction. I don't know it's a call instruction until I decode the bits of the instruction, okay? So what I can do is either I can, you know, I can add tags to the return address stack, you know, to treat it as a cache, or what you can also do is you can add to this instruction a pre-decode bit, which is stored in the cache, instruction cache. So when that instruction gets touched, you take a look at the two pre-decode bits, you take a look at the pre-decode bits, and then you see, hey, is this instruction of a type that I need to pay some attention to? If it's a pre-decode bit, say it's a return instruction, I'm gonna push the next PC on this stack, for example, okay? So typically, what you will do is the logic for getting the next PC is you have the current PC accessing the instruction cache, using the PC will carry out a direction prediction whether that feed branch is gonna be taken or not taken. Then, you know, there'll be a next PC. We also access a BPP and DPAX accessing the return address stack. Based on the pre-decode bits of that instruction, we will select the next PC to be either from the return address stack, or the BPP, or PC first. Any questions about target prediction? So the size of the return address stack you want it to be, you know, as big as your call depth. And, you know, fine, eight, 16, 32 likely go fairly deep in a call stack, okay? This, you want to be basically the working set of your branch instructions. Like I said, these days, people are making these big, huge, okay. I have a question about that. Yeah, if you make those big, right, the electronics that actually do the match in that cache is, I mean, it's doing the comparator in, is it 64 away or 64K at a time? Isn't it going to expend a huge amount of energy doing, you know, the bigger, the more you make this cache, the more energy you're going to waste or no. Anyone else? Cause you want it to all happen in parallel, right? That you're doing it to make it happen fast. Wanna help me? I forgot all that I talked about in the last few lectures. You guys should remember. Anyone? Yes. Okay. Big means I cannot make it fast unless I burn a lot of energy. I want it to be fast. Remember, I'm trying to do one every cycle. Big means I'm not going to be able to make it fast. It's going to burn a lot of energy. So what do people do? They say, okay, I'm going to have a small BTP, which I'll get in one cycle. At the same time, I'm accessing this big BTP. I'm going to take two cycles to access it. And so I can make, so I make it a little slower and take a little less energy. And so I'll charge with this one cycle BTP and I will connect myself after. So like the little one is fully associative and the other one is some kind of. No, it's typically smaller. Smaller, but fully associative. Not necessarily. Oh, even worse. Let's make this complicated. No, it's a normal set associative. It's normal set. It depends on how much you can put in one cycle and how much energy you're going to spend. So that's what they do. But it's like the speed, power, trade-off, size comes in all the time. So there's a lot of things I honestly take a look at to stop these people do it. I said, boggles my mind how you do it. You've got to be better ways than typically they are. Where it requires a very different way of thinking. But that's what you see in a normal pipeline design. Oh, the fetch stage is four cycles. Then I have a small BTP that I can access in one cycle, larger, two cycle, and the larger is connected to the smaller. Make sense? And so if it does go to the second level cache, then. No, second level BTP, it's always going to the second level BTP. It's not that I'm missing in one and then going to the second level because then I have to deal with, oh, I have a miss and what do I do in this miss? I'm accessing the second level, but I'm doing it slowly. So then do you get a stall in this four-page or four-step fetch cycle? Not if you're getting hits in the small one. Right, I'm saying the smaller misses. So you're asking both caches at the same time. If the small cache hits in one cycle, you're golden and you just keep going. If the bigger cache hits two cycles away, then you created a stall in the fetch for one. You created a one-cycle bubble in the pipeline. Gotcha. And if that misses, then you're all four cycles. Ah, then you're back to the primitive time to figure out wherever. So the small, big thing, later on we'll talk about data TLVs. They have these, what they call micro data TLVs also, even instruction TLVs, four, eight entries they can get in one cycle and get the other one in two cycles, something like that. They play a lot of games like this, but in this course, we're gonna learn the concepts and then some of those games follow naturally. But if you ask, I can tell, if I remember, I do remember that stuff. Okay. So now let's talk about correction prediction, okay? Where you have to map the conditional pre-C to a taken, not taken decision. It's like seems fairly simple thing to do, but you want to be very, very accurate because if you're wrong, then you have a single cycle bubble for a simple case, much, much more complex. Okay, so for example, if I'm trying to, later on we'll see, hey, I'm doing eight instructions at a time and I have a single cycle bubble. That's eight instructions execution opportunity, okay? Not this one little thingy that we have in a simple pipeline, all right? So let's start off with a very, very elementary structure. What this elementary, very elementary structure is going to be is I'm going to have a table that is called the branch history table. I'm gonna access it with the PC of an instruction and there's going to be a single bit over here, okay? And if the bit is zero, I'm gonna say the branch is not gonna get taken. If the bit is one, the branch is taken, okay? So let's take a piece of code that is an inner loop with a loop count of three. So the branch is going to get taken three times and not taken one time, all right? So now let me say I have a single bit branch history table. What I do is I start off by putting a value zero here, saying that the branch is not taken, okay? First time the branch executes, it's taken, I go to the table, see it's n, so I predict it's not taken and I'm wronged and then I change, because the branch is taken, I change the entry of this to be taken over here, okay? For the next branch, I go to the table, I see it's gonna predict taken and it is taken, so it is good, I don't change this, you know? Next branch, it's gonna be predicted, it's taken, it's taken, things are good. Next incarnation of that branch of that PC is gonna be predicted, it's taken, but it's not taken, so this is the wrong prediction and then I'm gonna predict, I'm gonna change this bit to be n over here, okay? Now, next time the branch is encountered, it's going to be taken, but this history table is gonna predict it's not taken. I'm going to then change that to t and so on and then I get this pattern over here, okay? So I have two built-in mispredictions per iteration of the loop, okay? Half the time I get it right, half the time I get it wrong. And, you know, the issue with this simple thing is this branch predictor changes its mind too quickly and it's not taken enough effort to learn in some sense. Okay? So the next thing we can do is we can have, instead of having a single bit over here, have a two-bit counter, okay? So I have a table of two-bit counters indexed with a PC. For each PC, I'm gonna have, or for each PC that maps onto that entry of the table, I'm gonna have two bits, okay? And the two bits are gonna take on four different values from zero to three. You know, I'm gonna say zero is very strongly not taken, one is weakly not taken, two is weakly taken, and three is strongly taken. Okay? So in a sense, I'm gonna force this direction predictor to mispredict twice before changing its mind. Okay? So let us see what's gonna happen. All right? So, you know, I'm starting off with a value of zero, zero, I'll go and predict it's not taken, the branch is taken, so I'm going to increment this value from zero, zero to zero, one, so it's, you know, weakly taken. Next time, the branch, I go and say branch is weakly not taken, but it's taken, prediction is wrong, I'm gonna increment it to one, zero, okay, so that's weakly taken. Next time, the branch is predicted correctly, so I increment the counter to, from one, zero to one, one, strongly taken, that's the uppercase T, branch is not taken, so this prediction was wrong, so I decrement the counter from one, one to zero, one, that is weakly taken, okay? That's good enough to provide a correct prediction for this, the branch is taken, I increment the counter to, from one, zero to one, one, so strongly taken, that's good, strongly taken, predicted correctly, this is not predicted correctly, but, you know, after initially starting off, I start getting three correct predictions and one incorrect prediction, thanks. You know, this was done by our own faculty member here, why do we go and talk to the PDC many years ago, Jimsman. All right, so, because branch prediction is so important, people are coming up with all sorts of clever ways, okay? One of the, the two best predictors are one of the first clever ways of taking, you know, and in your homework too, you don't have to simulate, you know, different predictors, I guess, okay? The next, you know, one amazing innovation that happened is, yeah? I have a question, do you guys have, branch instruction in the program, would have a separate table assigned to it, or the table would be a common table? It would be a common table, but each branch will have a separate table. Okay, of course, but, you know, the entire bits of the, yeah, unless you, multiple branches could map to the same entry, so unless you distinguish them between tags and so on, which you typically don't do, okay? So you have a table of, you know, one, zero, two, four entries, or whatever it is, okay? You select an entry for this. Other questions? Okay. So, and the same for this stupid counter too, right? Each branch will select it, okay? So, now, the co-related predictor, what it observes is that different branch outcomes are co-related, okay? And I sort of won't go into the necessary details over here, so what you do is that, you know, you maintain a branch history register, which is a history of recent branch outcomes, okay? For each branch, okay, you could actually maintain separate predictions per PC, and you could have a branch history register for the branch at that PC, okay? Or you could have a global branch history register, which keeps track of the outcomes of, you know, all the recent branches, regardless of the LNPC, okay? And you can also have combinations, okay? So, let us take a sort of a very simple example where I have only a, you know, the branch history table is, again, that only one bit, okay? And now I have a two-bit branch history register, okay? So, the two-bit branch history register is keeping track of the outcomes of the previous two branches. They could be not taken, not taken, not taken, taken, taken, not taken, taken, taken, all right? So, for each one of those outcomes, it's going to, so they're going to be four, you know, four branch history table bits, entries. So, for each one of those global history register combinations, I'm going to access a different entry of the branch history table. I'll get a zero or one, okay? Zeroes are not taken, one is taken. So, initially, I'm going to make all those four entries not taken, okay? A, you know, I get a branch over here, and so the previously, before that, the history in the branch history register is zeroes, so the branches are not taken, okay? So, the previous two branches were not taken. I'm going to predict the next branch is taken, and it was wrong, the branch was taken, so I'm going to set that history register bit to, the history table bit to taken, okay? Now, in my recent history, the last two branches were not taken, taken. I'm going to go and predict it's not taken. I'm wrong, okay? I'm going to set that to taken over here, okay? And then, now, when I see the next branch, the global history register has taken. Last two branches were taken and taken, okay? So, this is the entry in the table I select. I predict it's not taken, I'm wrong, so I change that to taken, okay? Because the branch was, and then, now, next time, I go and see the history is, the last two branches are taken and not taken, okay? I, sorry, sorry, over here, but I see this branch over here, last two branches are taken, I go in and I get this prediction. It says the branch is taken, it is not taken, so I'm wrong, so I change it to not taken, okay? Now, when I get to this branch, the last two branches are taken and not taken, so I get this entry, it's not taken, it's wrong, I change that to taken, okay? And this continues. Yeah? Isn't this similar to the two-bit counter that we had? In a two-bit counter, we had four states, here we had, we have two states and two histories. That's similar, okay? But then, we go further. I'm just introducing the simple thing first. It's similar, not the same, it's similar, okay? So in a steady state, what you will do is you'll end up getting a pattern of mispredictions sort of like this, okay? So what happened, you know, this is actually in a sense works in the two-bit counter and the reason why that's the case is this branch history, the register wasn't long enough to capture the pattern. The pattern that I have is taken, taken, taken, not taken, okay? I'm not being able to capture it in two bits. Let me see if I now have a three-bit branch history register, okay? Now let's work through this. So I have a branch history table, a three-bit branch history register, so I have two to the three or eight entries over here, okay, and these are the different entries corresponding to these different values of the history register. I initially start off by making them all not taken and all these branches here, global history register, three bits are all not taken, okay? I encounter the first branch, previous histories, not taken, not taken, not taken, so I select this entry, I say it's not taken, okay, I'm wrong, I change this entry to taken, okay? Now next time I see, you know, the history at this point would be not taken, not taken, taken, so I'm going to go to not taken, not taken, taken, I predict not taken, I'm wrong, I change this to taken, okay? Now when I get to this point, the history is taken, taken, sorry, not taken, taken, taken, okay? Not taken, taken, taken, I access this entry, say it's not taken, I'm wrong, change this to taken, all right? Now when I get to this point here, the previous three branches are taken, taken, taken, so I go to this entry, I predict it's not taken, and I'm correct, okay? And I leave it as not taken, okay? I go to this branch, the previous history is taken, taken, not taken, so I go to this entry, you know, predict not taken, I'm wrong, change it to taken, then I get to this branch, the previous history is taken, not taken, taken, so taken, not taken, taken, I'm wrong, change it to taken, and then next time, it's not taken, taken, taken, not taken, taken, taken, I predict it's taken, I'm wrong, right, okay? So after this initial startup, I'm getting perfectly correct after that, all right? Observe that, I started off by accessing this entry, this entry, this entry, this entry, this entry, but in steady state, and then, you know, this entry, in steady state, I'm only accessing the grayed out entries over here, the white entries are not being accessed after that, all right? Basic concept of a, you know, predictor. So, you know, there are multiple design choices over here, you have different VCs, you have history registers, you could have one global branch history register, or one per PC local history register, each of them capture different types of history, this was a global history register in some sense, capturing the entries of the loop, it all happened to be local too, so this is a piece of code, okay? But, you know, typically, you know, global ends up, because you could actually capture correlations, you know, if you have if then else, if then else, okay? You can actually capture the correlations between that to the global history register of those branches. Okay, if you read the papers, I'll give you examples of these, okay? Another choice is how many history bits should you have? Longer histories are better for some applications, shorter are better for others, okay? But also, as I have longer branch history registers, the branch history utilization decreases, because many patterns are never seen. Here, after a while, these patterns were never seen. Okay, so I'm only utilizing half of the branch history table. Here I was using three quarters of the branch history table, okay? So, you know, you play tricks like you concatenate with the PC and branch history register to allow multiple PCs to share a, you know, one of these branch history tables, and, you know, the size of the branch history table, of course, is two to the branch history, trying to fill that. Longer predictors also take longer time to train, and, you know, some people have, you know, have had between eight to 12 branch global history register, history register, so. Wait, can you set up the eight to 12 history register, is there a? Bits in the history register. Oh, bits in the history register, yeah. Keep track of the last eight to 12 branches. Okay, so, you know, hey, one thing works better in one case, another thing works better in another case, just like we had the BTB, or, you know, return address stack, and we chose one of those, okay? Well, you do the same, okay? So, you know, you can have a hybrid predictor, where what you do is you have different predictors, okay? A simple predictor is going to predict branches that are independent of history. Correlated predictor actually predicts branches that need history, and then you have another chooser circuit that chooses which one of these outcomes to take. And, you know, this structure was very widely used in a lot of the machines in the, you know, 90s, 2000s, you know, early 2010s, and then after that, more recently, what started coming is more of these, you know, little more predictors, so a little more complicated predictors. Before I do that, I just want to, you know, go back here, all right? Simple history table over here. Say I have a, you know, 1K entry history table. Each entry is one bit, one k bits. If I have this, you know, two bit sanctuary encounter, one k entries, each is two bits, two k bits, okay? I start getting over here, through these correlated predictors, I'm taking many more bits, okay? So, you know, I have, if I have, you know, 12 bit history, two to the 12th history tables in some sense. That's okay if I have more resources, as long as I can figure out how to do that in a fast enough cycle time, because I want to be able to carry out a branch prediction every cycle. So, when this predictor was first proposed, a lot of people, you know, oh, this will never get implemented, too complex, too many resources, okay? But, you know, when there is a need for something and you have, hey, this is something that's going to work well, it seems very complicated, but man, I really need its capabilities, they come up with ways to try and figure out how to do it, you know? In the budget, in the space and the time budget they have. So, what this does is it actually attacks the branch history, the rest of site problem using the rudimentary machine learning. And pretty much, you know, one of my machine learning colleagues would tell me, you know, hey, everything you guys are doing in architecture is machine learning. All these predictors are then assessed machine learning. But they actually just find work. For a while, a lot of the other machine learning techniques do, you know, and you don't know they exist, but then. So, what this perceptron predictor is, you have an array of function coefficients. You select a row of function coefficients over here, okay? And then you do a multiplication of the branch history bit register bit i with a function coefficient i, and then you do a summation of that. And if that exceeds a threshold, then you predict the branch is taken, otherwise the branch is not taken, okay? So, the size of this table is, you know, how many PCs I have, times how many branch history register entries I have, because I have one function entry for each branch history register bit, times how many bits I have in F over here, in two bits, basically, okay? And, you know, this perceptron predictor, you know, actually ends up doing the accuracy much better. How, why, who caps, it works? Okay, it does well. Carrying out my simulation, it works. Okay, and then people have also been trying to find, you know, situations where it doesn't work to get the accuracies even more, but, you know, this and another related one, the Dage predictor, are the ones that are used widely these days. Okay, so, you know, if I get a predictor with 95% accuracy, now, my CPI, basically, only 5% of the time I'm seeing this two-cycle bubble in the simple pipeline. I've got it down from 30% to 2%. Of course, once I start doing more, as I said, each cycle ends up being multiple instruction opportunities. I have to, I lose that, and now I have to add even more of an accurate branch predictor. Okay, so this is just sort of summarize, you know. Okay, questions about this? It just sums one, like, one single bit number, a bunch of single bits into a four-bit quantity and compares it to the whole threshold. No, it multiplies a single bit with a bunch of, like, two-bit quantities, if you will, and then that carries out the summation. So it's basically, either you add that or not add that to the threshold. So that's just like an XOR. XOR function, right? No, the addition is not XOR. The multiplication. The multiplication is not even an XOR, it's just AND, right? Because then, again, like, when we have the sign with the end of the threshold, we have the sign to comparison, right, with the threshold at the end. Yeah. That, like, again, it takes time, it takes time, it gets faster. What is he saying? No, no, no, no, no, okay. So, yeah, so, you know, we do this summation and it's a science thing. Take some bits from this. You know, do it, the sign comparison over the threshold, okay, is less than an addition. And you, these days, you know, you can do your 64-bit addition and you can do your addition. And you must just have a plot cycle, less than a plot cycle. And then you spend the other half just to get the history address. Oh! No, you do that in parallel. Okay, and then you just. No, just check with the marks. Huh? Then you just, I think you just select the one. Your entire history is just the interviewer. Yeah, these are all the. The entire history of the interview. Yeah. Okay, so we took a little longer on this, but that's the whole point is to ask questions rather than, you can read the slides rather than have me read them to you. Point is to ask questions. All right. Now let's start the next section on multiple issues. So really now, we're at a point where, you know, we want to try and make, figure out how to do things better and better, faster and faster. All the tricks we can play. Not all, you know, many tricks we can play. And the name of the game is going to be Exploiting Parallelism. Doing more than one thing at a time, okay? So, you know, last year we talked about pipeline-level parallelism, you know. Now we're gonna talk about instruction-level parallelism where we'll do multiple independent instructions fully in parallel. We'll start off with, in this unit, with limited multiple issue. Then we'll go on and spend, you know, a couple of weeks on dynamic scheduling, much more white art processing. Then we'll go ahead and spend a lecture or two on data-level parallelism and a couple, three lectures on data-level parallelism. And what we're doing is again, trying to do more things in the CPU, but we will, in this unit, talk a little bit about, you know, getting some help from the compiler to also do stuff in parallelism, okay? So we'll talk about what are the issues in scaling multiple issue. Dependent stacks are gonna be an issue. Bypassing is gonna be an issue. We'll see that. Then we'll talk about multiple issue designs. And then we'll talk about, you know, compiler techniques that people have come up with to feed these multiple issue designs. Okay. So here was a simple scalar pipeline, you know, called, you know, doing one instruction per stage. And at the max, best you can do is, you know, you can, best you can do is the CPI or IPC is gonna be one, one instruction per cycle. You're only fetching one instruction. Only one instruction per cycle. You can rarely get to this because of hazards, okay? And then, you know, also the more pipeline you have doesn't always necessarily work. So you just can't keep having more pipelining you also have to have, do more things in every cycle. So in basic multiple issue, basically you try and do multiple things. So I'm doing two instructions, fetching two instructions, you know, decoding two instructions, executing two instructions, you know, figuring out how to do cache accesses, writing back the results of two instructions. And that's instruction level profiles. You could do two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. These days people are doing eight plus, you know, some people even talking about 10. And, you know, so this was, let's say you have a piece of code, you're doing a single issue, one instruction at a time, going to the pipeline, no issues with the, here are the data dependencies over here and you took care of them with bypassing. And so there was instructions were flowing without any bubbles at all. Once you start doing multiple instructions at a time, okay, so now these two are going to the pipeline like here, you know, these do not have any dependencies on these, they go on the pipeline through here. Now, once I get to this instruction over here, this instruction is going to write into R6, this instruction is going to read into R6. So even though I can start fetching and decoding them at the same time, the second instruction has to stall to wait because of this data, read after write data dependencies over here. And then we have the bypass to get the value. And very similarly, you know, this instruction is going to stall and then load is also going to stall. This is going to be the diagram over here. So even though there were no stalls over here, I'm getting stalls over here, okay? If I were doing four, I'd get many more stalls. Okay, so what are the challenges that you're going to have to deal with? And typically what we do is, you know, here's a pipeline or any pipeline. You talk about the front end of the pipeline. The front end of the pipeline is the part that's fetching the instructions and decoding them. Okay, and then the back end of the pipeline where you're doing the execution and memory access and write back and all that kind of stuff, okay? So in the front end, if you want to do more than one instruction at a time, you have to fetch more than one instruction at a time. Okay, we'll see that. You have to decode more than one instruction at a time. You have to start executing or issue, as it's called, more than one instruction at a time, okay? And you may or may not be able to have all possible combinations. We'll see that. You need to be able to read multiple registers at a time. Previously, for each instruction, you're reading two inputs. For two instructions, you're reading four inputs, okay? In the back end, you need to be able to execute multiple instructions. You need to be able to write back the results of multiple instructions into registers. And you're gonna need to have many wider data bypass paths. And we will see it can actually be of the order of N squared times P, whether for N-wide to the P-depth, pipeline depth of P. But also then, you can build hardware to out that. But how are you going to keep that hardware as bad? Okay, if you give this piece of code to the dual-issue hardware, it's going to have these calls. If I gave this piece of code to a four-issue machine, it's gonna have many, many more calls, okay? So what I have to do is I have to create more instruction-level parallelism in the program to be able to feed the machine that is exploiting that. Questions? Okay, we'll stop here.
