Title: 752_Lec23
Source file: 752_Lec23.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

share this, we'll talk a little bit about it, all right? And, you know, the big question comes as cache interference, okay, and really, you know, if you are sharing the instruction cache and you're deteriorating the instruction cache hit rate for any thread, if the thread's not touching instructions it's not doing anything, if that's a significant degradation. So the question that comes is, you know, can the working set of multiple threads fit in the caches? And we talked last time about the single program multiple threads model, okay, multiple data model, where the instruction caches, which are the important part, okay, the instruction code, the code is shared amongst the different threads, and so the instruction cache holds the code from the different threads, which is the same code, if you will. Okay, what you need to now have is the map table. The map table has to have as many entries as their number of threads, times how many other architectural data attributes you have, okay? We are giving one map table per thread, one program counter per thread, what we do. But the physical register file can be shared, and it should have at least as many registers as the number of architectural registers per thread, times the number of threads, plus how many other instructions are in flight, which could be from multiple threads, all right? And in fact, not could be, would be from multiple threads, typically. How are the, you know, the re-arm buffer, load store queue, reservation stations, and here, you can, you know, do either static or dynamic, depends on what you want to achieve. What a static partitioning would do is, in a sense, basically split up the hardware somehow between the two different threads, okay? So say I have, you know, I gave three fourths of the resources to one thread and one quarter to the other thread, if you were to statically decide that. By statically, it means, you know, before you start executing the threads, okay? And you can do static portions, and so what that does is that, even if I have a low IPC thread which is not necessarily using all the slots, okay? You know, it doesn't start the high IPC one because, you know, each one, because it's not, the low IPC thread isn't keeping all the resources occupied, it's only keeping its resources occupied, okay? On the other hand, of course, now, you know, I mean, you could have situations where one thread could use more resources than the other so you end up having a little low utilization, and the other is dynamically, you know, basically let the threads fight it out with each other who gets the resources, and, you know, that's going to get you high utilization, but, you know, there's always the possibility one of the threads, you know, could starve because someone, okay, a thread that's constantly using resources is not going to let someone, you know, it's going to take them over to someone and starve that other thread. And so this paper that you just read, you know, the Dalton paper talks about, hey, you can actually do, you know, basically by controlling what you fetch. What you fetch then just determines what happens in the rest of the machine, okay? So you can actually fetch instructions from the thread with a few in-flight instructions. So this simultaneous multi-threading, again, you know, it's like shows up sometimes in a lot of processors because of, you know, many of the arguments that we've made for utilization, et cetera, et cetera. And then maybe the next generation, they don't use it, and then sometimes someone else uses it again, et cetera. Okay, so, you know, these things come and go and the way these things work is many a time work goes in a process that is determined by the lead architect. They decide just what's going to go, you know, after you've entered a different lead architect, more of a fan of simultaneous multi-threading or hyper-threading or not a fan, and, you know, these things bounce around. So, you know, I mean, this is another one of the tools that we have in our bag of tools, and, you know, they keep changing from time to time whether they're used or not. So, you know, people argue about the power implications of multi-threading, and, you know, the question is, hey, you know, is multi-threading at all a problem? For static power, which is static power if you remember is you are using, you know, you are using static energy, expending static energy, whether or not those transistors are being used or not. Okay, and so if you are actually doing something on top of this static wasted power, if you will, then anything that increases the utilization helps amortize the static power. Okay, let's make it more better power efficient. For dynamic power, again, it's highly dependent on the utilization. A significant factor is the cache activity, and if you're actually creating more cache misses, okay, maybe you're actually expending more dynamic power. And that is why I think for sometimes people say, hey, no, you know, for my relevant data cache size and this, you know, and for the workloads that I'm considering, this actually don't end up taking more power. And, you know, the reverse argument is, hey, if static power importance is increasing more, which, you know, there's some argument that it is, in that given environment, then overall multi-threading ends up being more powerful. So, you know, these days, what you do is, I'm not going to talk about multi-threading for like 15, okay? If you have multiple threads, then people play, you know, all sorts of other interesting tricks with them. You can build multiple processors on a chip, or a chip multi-processor. You can also have multi-threading, and both of them will get you more throughput on multiple threads. The, you know, if I build multiple processors without doing multi-threading per process, I'll probably get a simpler machine and faster clock, but SMP will get you better performance on a single thread, you know, thread with basically an out of order processor. And if you can then use other threads, in a sense, you know, SMP is converting the thread level parallelism to instruction level parallelism. So people, you know, like I said, you know, the multi-processors, chip multi-process, we'll talk a little bit about several aspects of that next. But, you know, people end up perhaps, you know, doing a little bit of both. Okay, so the one question was, okay, now I have, you know, these multiple threads over there running at the same time, and I have an exception. Okay, what do I do? What do you have to do if you have one thread running? Flush the ROV and whatever it is, and handle the exception, go and come back and do that. Okay, and the nice thing, and the nice thing about the micro-architectures we've talked about is, you have precise interrupt. You can stop at any point and come back at any point, and do that point at any time. Okay, so, you know, again, if I have an exception in a thread, you know, if I recognize, if I have, you know, remember, I'm only recognizing one exception for thread, okay? And, you know, if I have multiple recognizable exceptions in multiple threads, I would just recognize one, stop the other one, and, you know, restart that if necessary. So, in the best case, if you have, like, let's say, four threads on an SMT thing, all four have a unique style of exception, so, can the processor, like, handle all four of them at the same time? You're only handling one at a time, okay? You are only handling one exception. The others, you won't even recognize them. Remember, you only recognize the exception when you're ready to retire the instruction, okay? You know, so, whichever comes first, you know, you handle the others. You can just say, hey, you know, come back when it's your turn. You restart from some other point, and then you come back, and then, if you create the exception again, then we'll recognize you at that time. Yeah, you know, if you have these type of exceptions, you can choose to recognize them at any point. Remember, you know, when we started talking about the exceptions, we said, you know, we're gonna bite the bullet, and then, actually, recognize the exception at any arbitrary instruction counter. It's not at a branch, not at something else, or at any arbitrary instruction counter. Okay, to, yeah, I mean, you know, the summary. Okay, next, I want to move on to give you a really bird's eye view of multi-processors, shared multi-multi-processors. This is really just gonna be a, you know, bird's eye view of, you know, three of the issues that come up in multi-processing. CSCC 757 delves into these issues, and other multi-processing issues in great detail. It's an entire course, as well. But, you know, since many people stop with this class, and they should at least know these three issues that we talk about that come up in multi-processing, so we're gonna do that. Okay, so, you know, we are gonna be talking now more about the CPU and memory, and the connection, and multiple CPUs being connected. Three issues we're gonna talk about are cache coherence, synchronization, and memory consistency. And for cache coherence, typically there are two approaches. One is what is called a snooping approach, which was the first approach for cache coherence on, you know, SMPs which were symmetric multi-processors. We'll see what symmetric meant, in some sense. And, you know, that's typically for a, you know, small number of processors. Why a small number of processors? Well, we will see that. And then, as you start going to bigger and bigger multi-processors, you have to have different way of maintaining cache coherence. So we'll talk about snooping caches for, you know, small numbers of multi-processors connected by a broadcast network type of us. Then there are the other directory scale approaches for lots of processors that we won't talk about in 752, or you'll learn in 757. Okay, so let's take this, you know, what multi-processors are gonna be doing, again, is, you know, you have multiple program counter, each processor is going to be running a different program for a different thread, okay? And the, so that is what we call thread-level parallelism. And those threads are basically asynchronous tasks that are not started and stopped together. They can start at any time and proceed at different places, and, you know, stop at, you know, different times. These tasks are not coordinated in any way. The parallelism in these tasks are not coordinated in any way in that, you know, starting and stopping and how we execute it, which is different from the SIMD machines and the vector machines that we talked about, whereas there's a single instruction doing the parallel work on all the different data items in a very coordinated fashion. So here is now a example that we're gonna take of your database web server, and this is basically, you know, an ATM machine. You're withdrawing some money from an ATM machine, from your account, okay? And so what you do is, you know, you have some, you have an account, and the account has a certain balance, and you want to withdraw a certain amount. You're gonna check to see if the amount is more than, if the balance is greater than or equal to the amount. If it is, you are going to decrement the balance by the amount and spew out the cash. And now, you could be having multiple withdrawals from different ATM machines. Different times at the same time, who knows? You gotta make sure it works as if it were on the same time. Okay, so this account is shared amongst the, you know, different threads. So you can't put it, you know, this is not a scalar, but even with a single scalar variable, you cannot put it in a register because any time something is shared, any variable that is shared by multiple process, you know, that's gonna be shared potentially by multiple processors, actions on that shared variable have to be visible to the multiple, okay? And we will see the actions that happen on memory locations, which happen to be in the caches, we can keep visible. But if a variable ends up in a register, what's in the register of the processor? It's hard to make visible, do in a processor, okay? Are you with me on this? So you cannot allocate data that is shared that is going to be updated, okay, into a register. The ID and the amount are private variables and you are going to be updating them also, okay? And so those are going to be allocated to the register of an order. So what we first do is, you know, we will, you know, get the ID of the, you know, the account is an R1. We get a, you know, set the base address of the accounts in R3. Then you are going to load, you know, account ID or balance into R4 and the amount that you are wanting to withdraw is an R2. So you're going to check to see if R2 is less than R4, you know, if not, sorry, you know, if it's not less than, you're going to, you're going to not carry out the withdrawal, go to six. Okay, and if it ends, then you are going to subtract subtract the amount from the balance, which is an R4, write the result into the balance. Then you're going to store the balance into this account ID and balance, all right? And you're going to spear out the cash, all right? So we will take a look at this transaction and we'd be carrying out multiple of these transactions on multiple processors and see what issues can happen and how to make sure that this runs correctly. So the way people build multi-processors and they are sharing data is, you know, you can have two different options. One is what is called shared memory and the other is called message passing. In message passing, you know, there are two different threads. You're actually figuring out how they are communicating and your program is explicitly passing data from one thread to another thread, you know, by writing into it, you know, passing it directly. What happens in a shared memory is that, you know, the threads basically all can access a single address to multiple entities in context. And there could be multiple programs operating on multiple data. All that data is in a single address space, okay? Or more frequently, as we talked about, a single program, multiple data. Again, threads that are executing the same program or similar program on multiple data and all that data is in that single address space. And the way the different threads communicate is via loads and stores, okay? So one thread stores up into a memory address, and the other thread loads from that memory address. That's how a value gets from one thread to another thread. That's how they communicate, all right? So it makes the software writing simple because there is no need for messages. Communication happens naturally and you can support, you know, arbitrarily irregular patterns, whereas if you have message passing, some of the more irregular patterns become, you know, dynamic communication patterns become more complicated to deal with. So the software, you know, if software can be considered simple, this is relatively simple, okay? You know, in general, software is, even a single thread software is not simple. Multi-thread software is, you know, when the first chip multiprocessors came out, you know, one of the biggest applications for making people want to use multiple processors on these PCs was one of the Adobe software items. I forget which it was, and they paralyzed it, okay? And they thought they got it correct. They had a race condition that didn't show up until years later in the field, okay? So these things happen, you know? So we say simple, but it's relatively simple. On the flip side, the hardware becomes complex, okay? Because the hardware, you know, just like, you know, just like, you know, out of order of process of speculative execution, software thinks it's one instruction is being executed at a time, okay? In reality, something very different is happening, okay? Well, what we are to do now, you know, we want to basically give the appearance that, you know, what we want to do, give the appearance, is I have multiple processors, I have a memory that they're all sharing, and each one of them is going to, you know, get memory, everyone's seeing the same values in memory, et cetera, et cetera, okay? That's what the software is thinking, okay? So this is this uniform view of memory that software has, okay? In reality, this is what the hardware is. This is what the so-called memory system is, okay? Each processor has its own cache, and alongside, there may be part of the overall memory over here, okay? And then there is some interconnection network, okay? And then the caches and the memory interface with the interconnection network, and, you know, if, you know, and then somehow, you know, the values, and each one of these is making accesses independently, okay, on its own asynchronously, trying to give the appearance that, hey, what you're really doing over here is one shared, uniform shared memory is what we have to do, okay? That's what makes it complex. So, you know, the first question that we have to do with is, hey, you know, do we have what was historically called a uniform memory access machine where the CPUs are on, you know, basically I have some interconnection network, and on one side I have the CPUs, on the other side I have the memory. So any CPU, if it wants to access any memory address, so the memory is in multiple banks, different addresses in different banks, any CPU, if it wants to access any address in memory, it has equal latency to all of them, okay? So uniform memory access. So, you know, when you are writing your code or whatever and you're trying to, you know, get performance out of it, you have some idea, you need some idea of how long does it take to access memory? Well, in this case, regardless of what memory address you access, it's the same, okay? Now, you know, this is going to result in, in perhaps lower peak performance, because, you know, certain memory, if certain areas of memory are faster to access, say instead what I did is I had this other approach, which is a NUMA, or a non-uniform memory access machine. So when the different banks of memory, different memory addresses are split across the different banks of memory, you know, this bank is closer to this CPU. This bank is closer to this CPU, okay? So if this bank, this CPU wants to access memory in this address space, it's going to have latency A. If it wants to access over here, it has to go through the interconnection network, get in a different latency, which is likely to be higher, okay? So you have faster access to local memory, and, you know, you are going to get higher peak performance if you get the proper placement of data, but now the software becomes more common, all right? Over here, you're gonna have lower peak performance, again, because you're, in a sense, you're making all memory equally slow. The initial multi-blossom sort of started off like, yay, all right? So this is what we talk about to introduce some of the concepts that you have, but we've talked about now a little bit of the interconnection network, and, you know, these days, of course, you have a mixture of both styles. Okay, so any questions about Puma and Numa? Again, if you go to 757, you'll learn a lot more. All right. Now, the next thing I want to talk about is, hey, what is this network? This network either can be a shared network where basically is, you know, all the CPUs have access to the entire network over here, and what that does is that allows a CPU to observe at one point on this network what the other CPUs are doing in it, okay? Because it's a shared network that everyone can see, okay? The shared network, of course, now I want to, you know, get from point A to point B. I just go across the network, and I get from point A to point B in one hour. So there's low latency. However, this configuration, once I have a network that has a certain bandwidth, okay? And a CPU that's demanding, you know, say this network has a bandwidth of B, and each CPU is demanding a bandwidth of C, then the number of CPUs that can connect is B over C. Okay? So there is a limit to how many, you know, processors that can connect if the network connecting them has to be shared. On the positive side, the shared property is going to simplify cache coherence protocols, and we will talk about cache coherence protocols on a shared network, and you will see that they end up being reasonably simple. If you have a more involved network where all the CPUs cannot see what the other CPUs are doing, then the cache coherence protocol becomes, okay? So this is an example of a point-to-point network. Okay, here where, you know, this CPU is connected to this CPU and this CPU but not to this one. This one's connected to this one and this one but not to this one, et cetera. Okay, so here I have a ring, you know, bidirectional ring over here. So now if this CPU wants to access this memory, it takes zero hops. If it wants to access this memory or this memory, it has only one hop on the network. If it wants to access data on this memory, it has to one hop, two hops, or one hop, two hops. It takes multiple hops, okay? So you're gonna have longer latency because you may need multiple hops to communicate, but you can have higher bandwidth. Okay, why so now? Because you could be carrying out a communication on this path, on this path, on this path, on this path simultaneously, all right? So if I have a point-to-point network, one of the other parameters that comes up, and we won't talk about this too much, in fact, you know, after this, we won't talk about it too much at all, is the, what is the network topology? Is how are the different nodes, so the CPU and memory come nodes in a network, okay? If the nodes in the network are directly connected to other nodes, we have a, you know, what is called a direct network, but if these nodes are connected indirectly to other nodes via additional routing chips, then you have what is called a indirect network. Again, you know, pluses and minuses, you know, this way you can get to many, many more processors, but this way, you know, you basically can, don't have, you know, traditional logic that you need to connect. These things all depend, what network you use depends on exactly the scenario that you have. Okay, so what we're gonna talk about now is this particular implementation also referred to as a snooping bus multiprocessor, where I have multiple processors connected to a broadcast network, which is a bus, and the memories are now on the other side of the broadcast, okay? This network, we're just gonna consider a bus. It could also be a crossbar network. A crossbar network is in a sense is also a broadcast network with much higher bandwidth, but this bus-based, you know, network helps us, you know, elaborate on the issue that comes up, when we do that, okay? And, you know, this was originally also, this is a multiprocessor built, they were called symmetric multiprocessor because, you know, processor memory, quite symmetric, there is no unevenness that we have if there is, you know, if different, you know, CPUs have different latencies to connect to them, maybe higher, maybe smaller. The implementation, too, again, I sort of won't talk about it, but, you know, you can have a variety of different networks, and then you can go to, people build networks, even thousands of them. This is now a two-dimensional network. It could have arbitrary and dimensional networks. Okay, let me start off with the cache coherence issue. Just gonna drink a sip of water, I'll be right back. Synchronization, and then we talk about memory consistency tomorrow. Just to give you a full warning, this stuff is okay, we can get it done. It's complex, but reasonably simple. We've talked a little about synchronization, and then it becomes a little more involved. Memory consistency tomorrow. I'll introduce to you what the issue is, and then, you know, delve into it in 757, and even, these days, people are a little better at producing even the big exports guys. We only discuss SMP connected by a bus, and, you know, there are different options for different cases, so, all right. Let's go back to now, withdrawal from an ATM. And now, what we have is, we have two withdrawals, $100 each, from the same account at two different ATMs. Each one of these transactions maps onto a thread in a different processor, so this transaction is executed on processor zero, this transaction is executed on processor one. Each one of them is trying to withdraw $100 from the account that has $500 in it, all right? Okay, let's assume that we didn't have a cash. Why have a cash? It's a big problem for us, okay? It creates a path, you go fast to get to the problem. It's a problem. So, let's say we didn't have a cash, and, you know, and see what happens. Okay, so what happens is, this transaction loads the value of the account into R4, memory of the account value is 500, so it gets 500 in R4. It wants to withdraw 100, 500 is more than 100, so it subtracts that and gets 400, and this 400 then gets the written instrument. Okay, so again, you started off at 500, this loaded 500, the store wrote 400. This transaction, right now it's happening after this transaction finishes, all right? And once we sort this coherence out, then we'll see what happens if they are executing at the same time, or close to each other, that's when we talk about synchronization. Okay, so this processor now does the load from memory, memory is 400, so R4 gets 400, 400 is greater than 100, so you subtract that, R4 is 300, then you store 300 into memory, and you steal the $100. Life is good, the account has the correct value, you know, both sides, you've got your $100. Okay, well, any questions? Now, let us say we had a cache. So what process was out of cache, okay? So this is what's there in memory, this is what's there in processor zero's cache, this is what's there in processor one's cache, okay? And a cache could have a block in valid or dirty, that's what we know so far, okay? So this processor does a, memory has 500, this processor does a load from memory, gets 500, and now it is, that memory address has the value 500, and it's valid, all right? And, you know, right now I have my two caches, okay? And so I do that, and I do the store, I do the store of 400, that store, I get a hint in the cache, I store 400 into accounts, and I mark that cache block dirty. Notice now, memory has 500, the cache has 400, which is a 9th speed of the $100, okay? Now along comes this thread, and it runs on processor one, does the load, misses in the cache, goes to memory, memory has 500, bring 500 into the cache, okay? And set the bit valid, do the check, yes, decremented 400, and you now write 400 into that variable in the cache, and you set that bit dirty, and, you know, and now if you do another transaction, you know, you will get basically, you have the wrong account value over here. So, you know, you could have three different copies of that variable in the memory, in processor, if you use cache, and processor one's cache, and they can get it. So this is what happens in the write-through cache, and you say, okay, don't use a write-through, write back cache, use a write-through cache that's also going to write the value into the memory, if it's written in the cache, right? Then we won't have this problem, okay? Let us see what happens with a write-through cache. Again, I start off with 500 in memory, do the load, bring 500 into the processor zero's cache, do the store, write 400 into the cache, and write-through, so it also goes into memory. Now this two values are going to exist. This processor then now does the load, gets the right value, 400 from memory, has 400 in the cache, okay? And now does the store, writes 300 into this cache, into memory, and 300 is the correct account balance there, okay? But now, you know, this time there are only two different copies, okay? But, say you have another withdrawal, which happens to execute on processor P0. You will get a hit over here with the wrong account value, and so the, you know, you will be able to withdraw another $100 from here, make it 300, and run the account value 300. You have a problem. Which is good, if you want to withdraw a lot of cash in your account, you have to update it correctly. But, you know, it also screws up deposits. And now, oh, I didn't think of that. Make only one deposit at a time. Given that deposits are far less frequent than, anyway, that's too bad. Banks will figure it out. So they want hardware that does it correctly. That's why hardware cache coherence. So what is a given is that a particular memory address is going to be in multiple places. That's what will happen when you have a cache period. All copies, what you want to make sure is that, you know, if you want to have absolute coherence, which means all copies have the same data at all times, you can do that. It's hard to implement, and slow, but it's also not necessary, okay? So remember, a write back cache. A write back cache, the value of the cache and the value in the memory were different, right? If the block in the cache was dirty, the values are different. That's okay, that's okay. If no one sees an incoherent incorrect value. So it's not that you can't add multiple values. You just have to make sure that whenever there is a need for a value, you get the correct value. So that's what you're more interested in if there's a relative coherency. Temporary incoherence is okay, just like we have the write back cache. As long as all loads get the right values, or in other words, no one can look at incoherent data. Okay? So what we want to do is, here is the CPU, the cache, data cache tags in the bus. We are also going to have some logic that we call a coherence control. What this coherence controller is going to do is it's going to take a look at the requests coming out from the CPU to the data, and the requests that are going by on the bus, and see if the requests going by on the bus is for data that exists in this cache, and whether appropriate action should be taken. Okay? So this coherence controller is going to execute a cache coherence protocol, which is going to tell you what to do with a local copy when you see different things happening on the bus. All right? So we are going to basically only talk about bus-based coherence protocols. These are also called smoothing protocols or broadcast protocols. Okay? So what we're going to have is that we're going to have a bus called a snooping bus. And each processor now is going to have a cache. Each processor is going to have a cache. Each processor is going to have a cache controller. And these cache controllers are going to monitor and see what all is happening, what our traffic is going across the bus, in addition to looking at the traffic from their own CPU. So all the controllers are going to see all the transactions that are happening on the bus. Okay? Importantly, they're all looking at the bus at the same time. They're going to all observe the transactions that are happening on the bus. They're all in the same order. Everyone is seeing the same order. That's very important. Okay? So the bus is going to be the ordering point. Requests coming from different processors somehow have to arbitrate, and one of them is going to get on the bus. But then every processor or every cache controller is going to see all the requests on the bus that appear on the bus in the same order. And that's what the protocol is going to rely on all the process of seeing the total ordering of the bus. So we start off with a very simple protocol for write-through caches. So we are going to distinguish between this cache controller, or this cache controller and the cache. Okay? Process of side events and bus side events. In the simplest case, there are two process of side events, the read and the write. Okay? And there are two bus side events. A bus read and a bus write. A bus read is when some other processor is trying to read that cache block. Why is it trying to read that cache block? It comes because that other processor had a read miss in its cache. And so the request appeared for as a read miss. The second bus side event is a bus write. Where basically there is a processor writing into the block. Okay? The processor is trying to write into this block in the cache. It's a write-through cache that write also goes on the bus on its way to the middle. Okay? Are you familiar with this? So a bus write happens when there is a write-through by another processor. So far so good. There is a very simple cache for headers protocol for a write-through cache. And we are going to call it a valid and valid protocol. So each state now, now here's the cache. Here's the data for each block, the tag for each block. Now in addition also you're going to have some state bits in each cache block. Okay? You know, previously you knew that you have like a dirty bit. That was a state bit. Okay? Or a valid bit or an invalid bit. Okay? You've seen those before. Here now, I have write-through caches. There are two states per block. A valid state means the cache has the block and an invalid state means that, you know, that block doesn't have the process of getting access data in that block. Okay? The cache doesn't have that block. So, and of course, again, we might have a bit of a simple, one valid bit. So these are the same bits that we would have in any cache right now, right? These are the same bits, but what you would do is you would have sometimes you would have more states. We will see. I think when we get to just for right now, these are the same valid bits that we would have in regular. The caches we've talked about. Exactly. And for, yes, you know, for a write-back cache, we'd have the dirty bits and so on. Yeah, this is just the same state bits. Okay? Something that I'm going to forget. So I'll tell you who asked me. Okay. So ask me. Remember, remind me to tell you about, hey, you know, this cache controller is checking, handling both process of site and bus site requests and how does it do that? Let us just see, you know, what the, how it handles the request, what actions it takes, and then we'll actually talk about it a little bit about, you know, how exactly it handles that and how you may have to duplicate the tags, okay? Oh, okay. So this is a a protocol, coherence protocol, you know, state machine diagram. And basically, you know, in the convention, it says, hey, here's an event and what's the generated event that happens, okay? So, you know, if anyone wants to write a block, you give it up and transition to an unmetered state. And you have a read miss, you get the data from memory. Let's see, let's work it through, okay? Okay. So, say I don't have a block, but a block is an unmetered state, okay? I have a read miss, okay? I have a read miss, that's, so I have a read, it misses, I create a bus read event and then that bus read event is on the bus. Others may be reacting to that bus read event. I'll bring in that block and have it in the valid state. If I have a block in the valid state and I do a read, fine. Processor does a read, it stays there, okay? If the processor does a write, it's a write through cache. I write the data in that block in the cache and I create a bus write event saying that, hey, I'm writing to this block X. That bus write event appears on the bus. Okay? If processor has a block in valid state and it observes a bus read event, okay? So, you know, block X is here in valid state and now a read to that block, a bus read, a read to that block appears on the bus. Okay? In this situation, again, I'm not going to do anything. I'm going to ignore that request because this bus request will get serviced by the memory and so the other processor now is going to have a copy of that block. Better copy of block with valid data. Now, remember that since it's a write through cache, the copies and the caches and the memory are always the same, okay? So even if I have a block, I'm not giving the block to anyone because the memory has the correct copy because if I wrote into it, I wrote it through. Okay? And they're getting the correct copy from the memory. So far so good. Okay. If now I have a valid block and I observe a bus write event to that block, if I observe a bus write event to that block, I transition to an invalid state. I could have a block in the cache that is in valid state and that block in the cache could be, there could be bus read and bus write events to that block. Okay? I ignore it. I stay in invalid state. If I have a write from the processor to the block that's in invalid state, in valid view, I don't have a copy of the block. You know, anything that, I can't access that copy of the block. It's invalid. Okay? I carry out a bus write operation to write but I do not do a write allocate. So I do not bring that valid copy in the block. Remember we talked about write allocate, write new allocate. Okay, so here I do a write new allocate and I don't get a copy of the block that I can access. Okay. Now let me make the point of what I was trying to make. So now, this cache coherence controller, I have these additional state bits in each block and this cache coherence controller is implementing the finite state machine and taking the actions. Now remember we talked about caches. Caches have data, caches have tags. All right? And when the processor has the request, I go and see whether I have a tag match. You know, all sorts of tricks are played with different cache types. I have a tag match in which case, you know, the cache has data that I'm interested in. Now what I'm saying is this cache coherence controller is servicing requests from the processor and also observing requests from the, on the bus. Okay. And when I, how does it, you know, and it takes action if those requests are for a block in the cache. How does it know it should take action? It checks the tags of the cache to see if that block for which there's a read or a write from the processor or does the bus read a bus write in the bus is in the cache. So the tags in the cache are being accessed by this cache coherence controller. If the processor is doing its job and sending out requests, you know, I'll be working, it's basically handling a request from the processor of every cycle. Or these days more than one per cycle if I'm doing two loads, okay. And also what's happening on the bus is, you know, I'm going to connect enough processors so the bus ends up being fully utilized for having a high utilization. Which also means this cache controller is seeing the requests on the bus and checking to see if that block is in the cache all the time. So basically what you have to do is you have to have two sets of tags. One to service requests by the processor and one to service requests by the bus. And two sets of tags means two sets of those state bits because the update to the state bits happen only in rare occasions. They happen only for correctness on rare occasions. They aren't happening all the time, okay. When an update happens, then of course I stop, you know, the processor from accessing its tags and update that state. Are you with me on this? So it's like two-ported force to tag but basically then being the same copy and when an update to the state bits of the tags happen, and in this case the co-host protocol really is updating the state bits if you will, okay. Then I carry out that update predominantly. Questions? Okay. But write-through caches aren't that interesting, okay. Because you want to have write-back caches. So let us see what happens now for write-back caches. For write-back caches, there are three processes of side-effects. A read, a write, and a write-back of a block that is dirty and is being replaced, okay. Even though technically that write-back is from here to here. It's really in view this as coming from this side to the bus as opposed to from the bus to the processor. Okay. So there's a bus write-back. On the bus, there is the bus read, which is a read missed by another processor, a bus write, a write miss on another processor. There could also be the copy-back of the block, of this dirty block being written back, you could copy it back to memory, and in some protocols, you could even send it to another processor, or you don't go through that. Okay. And so this copy-back is basically sending the block to memory and being done with it. And we only talk about for write-back, this bus-based directory for point-to-point, like I said, it gets quite a bit more complicated. Okay. So here now is a very simple, again, valid-invalid protocol with a write-back cache. So in a write-back cache, the two states, invalid means I don't have a copy of the block. I have it, and then it got invalid in my head. If I have a block-invalid state, it means, you know, I have the block, and, you know, and this valid state is going to be the form of a dirty state, too. Okay. I'm not gonna distinguish between dirty and not dirty right now. We will in the next protocol. So if I have a block, then, you know, it could be modified. I can modify it when that block is. So to summarize the protocol is that anyone wants to read the block or write the block, just give it up. And transition to invalid. And, you know, if the block is dirty, then you copy it back on replacement or any other request, and a miss is always going to get the latest copy of the block from the memory of the processor. Let us see how that protocol is going to work. So say I had the block invalid, okay? If I have a read request or a write request, I service it and I stay in the valid state. If I don't have a copy of the block, my block is invalid, okay? If I have a read miss, I do a bus write, bus read, and bring the block in valid state. If I have a write miss, I do a bus write, and bring the copy in the valid state, okay? If I have the block in valid state, and I see a bus read from some other processor, or a bus write from some other processor, I ignore it, I don't do anything. Because I don't have a copy of the block. If I have the block in valid state, if I see a bus read from another processor, I give up my block, so I copy back that block to the memory. If I see a bus write from another processor, I also give up that block and copy back that block and you know, hey, you know, in either one of these cases, the other processor could actually snarf it off the bus while it's going on the bus, while I'm writing and copying it back to memory. All right? And I mean, the protocols actually do that. So when I say these protocol has these two states, the next state that we have, we have three states, they actually have within each state, multiple intermediate states too, as some of those movements are happening. Just like we had in a non-blocking cache, right? In a non-blocking cache, the different parts of the block will come in a different cycle when we have to track which parts of the block are here. Very similarly, you can have each one of these states as they are transitioning from one state to another state, multiple other sub-states. Okay. Finally, if I have the block in valid state and it got replaced, okay, so I have to write it back. I write it back, which means I simply carry out the copy that block back. So basically, you know, again, to summarize, if anyone wants to either write the block, I give it up and if I'm replacing the block, I copy the block back. If I'm giving up the block because of someone else's reading or a point reader, write it, I copy it back, and the miss always gets the latest copy, either from memory, or if another processor has it in this cache and has given it up, to go to memory, I pull it off this block. Questions? Okay. Let's see now, with this protocol, what happens in our example? So this thread, memory has 500, this load gets 500 into the cache, our process is zero, it's valid, memory has 500. This store, okay, does a write into the cache, okay, and so it writes 400. So if I'm doing the read or write, I stay over here. Okay, read or write, I wrote 400 over there, I stay over here, memory has 500. This processor now does a load, it misses in this cache. So what now comes out of the cache is a bus read from processor one. Processor zero has the block invalid. It sees a bus read from processor one come out of the bus. So it copies back that block to memory, transitions to the memory. Okay, so it copies back that block to memory, so memory gets 400, and this block is now in processor one, reads that memory address, doesn't add in the cache, it misses. All right, and so now, goes to memory, gets 400, brings this into its cache, does the store, so it writes 300 into its cache, does not write into memory. Now the situation that we had was that processor zero executes another, the third withdrawal. That is now going to miss in the cache, so that request is gonna go on the bus. In this process of season, it will copy back 300 to memory, in metadata it's copied over there, and then this processor now will read the amount of value of 300 for each of the cache, and do the right thing. All right, questions about that? So I have a question. This is all happening between the CPU and the L1 cache, so it's happening that, that we kind of has to, right? Did everyone hear the question? CPU and the L1 cache. Before I can answer the question, tell me how many levels of cache? Three. I'm a real modern processor, maybe four, but we'll say three. Can we go with two? Can we go with one? Let's start with one. We only have one here. Sure. We only have one here. If we have only one here, if we have only one here, okay? Then it's happening, the bus is observing all the CPU activities in the L1 cache, and the L1 cache is observing the bus activity over here. Okay? It works. Now you say you have two levels of cache. You know, we learned more stuff in this multi-level inclusion, and you're saying what it was for? This is what it was for. Okay? So I have a processor, processor, L1 cache, L1 cache, L2 cache. And say I have a bus over here with the request of a different processor for coming out. Okay? And what I'm saying over here is this cache is observing, has to observe the request that other, if it's going to keep a copy of a block from memory, it has to observe what the other processors are doing so it can do the right thing. Okay? So now the question comes as there's activity going on the bus over here. Should this L1 cache be observing over here? Should this L2 cache be observing over here? You know, what I'd like to do is I'd like to make sure that, well, okay, let us say, remember our multi-level inclusions? What multi-level inclusion said is that, hey, the L1 is a strict subset of the L2 cache. Okay? So everything in the L1 cache is also there in the L2 cache. Say that I have only the L2 caches observing what's happening. Now, if the request on the bus isn't of interest to this L2, you're guaranteed it's not of interest to this L2. Okay? If it is of interest to the L2, what you can keep now is another state bit with each block, saying if it's there in the L1 or not. So if it's in the, of interest to the L2 and that block is in the L1, then that request ends up bothering me. And that is a sufficiently rare event. So I do not even need the dual tags over here because while this one is observing every bus event, okay, only a very, very small fraction of those events actually end up there. Yeah? So we don't even need the extra bits. We just make the validations propagate upward. So if you validate an L2 block, you evaluate the L1 block. So when I actually- Did everybody hear that question? I'm gonna take a couple of minutes. If you guys are fine with this. So yes, you could save on one bit. And every time there's an event of interest to L2, you send it to L1. But since the L1 is a tenth the size, or less than that of the L2, most of the events in the L2 are not gonna be of interest to the L1. So you don't want some. If these caches were exclusive, where's my pen? I think you just put it away in the bag. Huh? That you just put it away in the bag, I think. You can see it there. Is that good? If these were exclusive, which means the blocks here were different, then this cache and both of these have to be observable. If they were non-inclusive, where I get no guarantees, then again, this cache and this cache have to be observable. And because of the fact that multi-level inclusion makes this coherence much easier. That is why we have multi-level. Now, if you go through the three, four, whatever it is, there is one level that you have to maintain that coherence. And if they're inclusive, then yes, propagate the events of interest to the L2. Okay, two seconds for that.
