Title: 752_Lec22_a
Source file: 752_Lec22_a.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Also, further execute, you know, other, because the loop controller and all of that stuff is just done by a hardware counter. And further, now, this is massive parallelism, lots and lots of parallelism, okay? So I can have one vector pipeline, if I want to do more, I can have two vector pipelines, okay? And I don't, I can trade off the frequency for the parallelism over there. And frequency was what is burning energy, if you will. So, you know, I expect these vectors will generate even more interest going forward, especially since now many, you know, many of these things that you do, applications drive how hardware goes. Okay, it's the killer applications that drive how hardware goes, if you will, okay? There is a killer application these days that is matrix multiplication, okay? And that matrix multiplication, as long as that matrix multiplication continues to be another killer application, efficient hardware techniques to carry out matrix multiplication will continue to, in a sense, increase in performance. That is not only doing the actual multiply, but perhaps even getting the accesses to memory and fetching the data to, again, the processing it. So, anyway, questions about the number of the vectors? 

Let's move on to a different concept, and the concept of multi-threading. And, you know, again, this is in the design of the CPU. We talk about, you know, why do we want to have multi-threading, talk about utilization performance, then three implementations of multi-threading, which are, you know, commonly used. And I won't talk much about some of the others, so. Okay, how did, you know, what is multi-threading, why is it relevant, why is it interesting, okay? So, so far, we've talked about performance, okay, increasing the number of instructions per cycle, okay? But right from day one, right from day one, okay, the CPU, the central processing unit, it was supposed to be, you know, basically the most important thing in processing. So if you had something that was, you know, putting a lot of money in, building, and taking a lot of effort to build, and if you take a look at, you know, the design of the CPU versus the memory, et cetera, et cetera, you know, CPU has just taken much more overall, if you will, okay? And so if you are having something that you can deem very important, then you want it to be utilized a lot fully. You don't want to design something that is, you know, utilized at a very low level, okay? So right from day one, people considered the importance of making the utilization of the CPU high, all right? And, you know, these days, even a very basic processor, your cell phone processor, whatever it is, okay, server processor, even if it's four-way, it's not even close to fully being utilized, running a single program or a single thread, if you will, okay? You get, you know, IPC that is typically less than, why? So because you have mis-predicted branches. You have cache misses. You have data dependencies, okay? These all create latencies, and we've tried to come up with techniques to deal with those latencies by overlapping those latencies with other work, okay? But you still have that. So multi-threading is basically saying, look, you know, if I have one thread that cannot utilize the hardware resource fully, in this case the CPU, maybe I can have two threads or three threads or four threads. If I can somehow figure out how they could execute on the same piece of hardware, okay, then the parts of the hardware that one thread is unable to be utilized, I can use them for a second thread, in a sense, effectively for free, if you will, as far as utilization is concerned. That's what it means, the utilization. Okay? So, you know, why not have more than one thread, okay? And so, again, stepping back is that, you know, you think you're running your one thing on a CPU, okay? And that's what you care about when you're running your one application. That's what you care about, running fast.
