Title: 752_Lec17
Source file: 752_Lec17.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

a small number of sets, not for all sets, then perhaps we can do something else. And that something else, the first something else we can do is what is called a victim cache or a victim buffer. So because of the lack of associativity, something gets replaced from a set and what you'd like to do is you'd like to not send it all the way back to the next level, you'd like to retain it close by. So if you have a two-way set associative cache and you need to have basically three blocks mapping on the same set, what you can do is you can keep a small buffer, fully associative buffer between on the back side of the cache. So it sits on the fill path between the next level cache and the first level cache. And it can be small so it's fast. Whenever you replace a block from here because of a conflict, you put it in this victim buffer or victim cache. And now when you have a miss, you also check to see whether it's there rather than simply go to the next level and then if it is there you put it back in that cache. Now what this victim buffer does is now this is shared amongst all the different sets in the cache. So the sets that are having conflicts, this victim buffer in a sense increases their associativity. The sets that aren't having conflicts, you don't need additional associativity. And this ends up being very, very effective for small caches and this is also very widely used. You know a argument people have is hey, is this victim buffer reducing the miss rate or is it reducing the miss latency? It doesn't matter. It is in a sense overall reducing the effective memory access latency people. Questions about this victim buffer? Yeah. So is it accessed essentially at the same speed as the L1? It is accessed, yeah, it would be accessed. Again it all depends on how you make it work out. Yeah, it would be accessed at the same speed as the L1. And you know sometimes it could even be accessed even in parallel with this one. You show it that it's capturing victims. But you know just like a store buffer even accessing in parallel with the cache, okay, this could also be accessed in parallel with the cache. None of this stuff is visible to a programmer. Why bother programmers? They already got enough to deal with. So yeah, no, no, it's absolutely. Caches aren't invisible to programmers. Anything, any micro-architectural feature is by definition invisible to them. I might say that victim buffers are like even in marketing they will show that they have a victim. This is too complicated for a marketing thing in a sense. I mean it's understandable by people who have taken class like 752, but by no one else. You could probably write code to detect that it's happening in precise timing. So that's the other interesting point is all these micro-architectural features we talk about probably should actually have a class project sometime is to detect a particular micro-architectural feature in a processor. Yeah, you can write micro-bench marks to do that. Okay, that's our two-way set of associated cache. Set 0 are blocks, 0 and 512. Set 1 are blocks 1 and 517. Remember I sort of asked you to remember this block numbering of blocks in the set. So if you are having conflicts in a certain set then perhaps you can change the mapping so that you know if I have three blocks that map onto the same set and are causing the conflict I can have a map onto different sets. Okay, because remember the set I'm choosing over here is simply some set of bits of the address. Alright, so the next thing we can do is have what is called a skewed set of associated cache. Okay, so what you do is you have two ways. Here's a two-way skewed set of associated cache. You have two ways. One of the ways you access the set by the index bits as you were before. Okay, and the second way you now XOR some bits of the deck and access the other. Alright, so now the blocks that map onto the same set, if the same set of index bits are being used they would map onto a different set. Okay, and this also tends to reduce the number of. Not saying it doesn't always, every time you can always write a piece of code where this creates more conflicts in the other way. Okay, but typically you know this would end up actually reducing the number of conflicts. This is also fairly widely used. Any questions about this? So when you put a cache line in here, how do you decide bank one or bank zero? Depends on your replacement policy. So you kind of have a replacement policy that goes over bank one and bank zero at the same time? Yeah, so yes, the replacement policy becomes a little more interesting shall we say. Okay, and that is one of the reasons that sometimes it impairs the user base. You can never get that. You can only get one. That's always the case. The index is always the same for the different sets. This is what selects the set. Okay, now what selects the set for this address in this way is the hash of that, but a particular address will only go into one place over here. So there are also a whole bunch of techniques to restructure how the program is actually making the data accesses. Because you can get capacity misses because of poor spatial and temporal locality and you know, you actually have to, you can restructure it sometimes manually and sometimes more automatically and automatically the compiler needs to figure out that this restructuring preserves the semantics. So here's a silly example that, no this is not a silly example, the next one is a somewhat silly example. So here I have a piece of code where I have a two dimensional matrix that's stored in row major order. Okay, so Xij plus one is going to be in the next memory location after Xij. Alright, and I'm trying to write a piece of code that's going to sum all the elements on this two dimensional matrix. Okay, what I can do is I can either, you know, so here's my two dimensional matrix. Okay, I'm trying to sum all the elements and these are the consecutive memory locations because it's stored in row major order. If I write the code to carry out the summation this way, alright, then basically I'm going to have, you know, misses all the time and I'm not exploiting any of the spatial locality. Okay, instead if I write the piece of code to carry out the summations this way, alright, then these are all in, the elements of the row are all in consecutive memory addresses so when I fetch, you know, this one I will also be fetching, you know, if it's a, you know, eight element block, 64 byte block, eight bytes each element, then I'm, you know, fetching, I'm getting one miss followed by seven hex, if you will. Okay, so I can interchange the loop to now have more contiguous accesses. Another commonly used technique is called loop blocking. Okay, so and, you know, here is sort of like maybe a, you know, sort of a nonsense piece of code where what I'm doing is I have a, you know, array and I'm making repeated passes through this array carrying out, you know, some summations over there. Alright, so what I would do is I would start fetching from here and then go down all this and then come back and I have miss, miss, etc. Okay, instead what I can do is I can chop that work into blocks, if you will, and now these elements are all going to fit in the cache maybe if I chop it up correctly, then carry out my end iterations over here, then carry out end iterations on the next block, etc. Okay, so after the first miss in each block of code, I would be getting those multiple hits over there. So instead of, you know, carrying out, you know, this code over here, I'd actually chop it up into cache-sized chunks and now for each cache-sized chunk I would do the summation then move on to the next cache-sized chunk. Okay, and, you know, the assumption here is, hey, you know, get the cache size and, I mean, do you sometimes? Well, you know, what you can actually write this as, you can write this as basically a variable and then, you know, detect perhaps, you know, when you're running the code, make sure it's going to go dynamically or whatever, what the, you know, from one of the hardware concepts or configuration or whatever, get the cache size. So there are many multiple ways of doing that. So you can write, you know, this is just written as a variable and then whenever you run it on a different machine, you can figure it out what that variable is. Questions about loop locking? All right. Another technique people widely use is if I have two different loops that are basically now, you know, kept doing different computations necessarily but on the same data elements. So here I have this, you know, loop where I'm working on B-I-J and C-I-J and, you know, computing A-I-J and then another loop, I use the A-I-J and I add C-I-J to it and write the D-I-J. Okay. I could fuse those loops now and now when I run this piece of code, okay, so I have a miss here maybe, miss here, miss here, miss here, but then hit here and hit here, all right, because those are likely to be in the cache for, because this computation is happening very close to this computation, so A-I-J is likely to be in the cache right after this and C-I-J is likely to be in the cache after I run it over here. Whereas over here, you know, those elements could have, you know, if these data structures exceed the cache size, could be well out of the cache and have to be encountered misses over here. Okay. Are you with me on this? Very similarly now, if you actually, you know, again, have a loop very similar to blocking, what we did is you can split a loop into multiple loops to reduce contention for cache resources. So they're a variety, and you know, these very similar tricks, you know, things like this, for example, you know, can make a factor of 10 difference in the speed of your code, okay. All the other tricks that we learned, you know, et cetera, all great, but if you are constantly missing in the cache, you know, you have speed tanks very, very quickly. All right, now here's something else that is very commonly done and this is more for cache misses, instruction cache locality. All right, so typically, you know, if you have a piece of code, if condition, code one, else code two, then reconversion, go to code three, and this condition is such that this code to this condition is rarely false, so this code two is rarely executed, okay. So what you would normally do is a code would be laid out as, you know, code one here, code two here, and code three over here. This is how your typically your assembler would assemble that piece of code, okay. What you can first do is, first you actually put the green code and the red code, which are going to be more likely to be executed together, so they reside in the cache at the same time, okay, and then you can further say, hey, this piece of code is so rarely executed that I'm going to put it away in some, you know, some memory location that's far away, if you will, that would not reside in the cache at the same time as this piece of code over there, okay, and so I'm not wasting cache space for this blue code, which is almost never going to get executed, or, you know, the same thing, too, this could be on a different page somewhere, if you will, okay, so I'm actually increasing even, you know, how much of a page, construction page I'm using, for example. Questions about this? How do we do this? How are these procedures automated? Remember this thing from way back when? Okay, profile, piece of code, figuring out which branch is going to be taken or not taken, a branch that is so rarely taken because this is like an error code or something like that, error condition, you can then, as you basically lay out the code and create the executable, you can lay out the code in different places. Compiler, typically, yeah. So we have to provide the compiler with the trace information. Yes, you have to provide that profiling information. Okay, now let's make life a little interesting. So you remember this critical word first, all right? Where, you know, the latency of access of the time to get the first word and the latency of the transfer is to get the rest of the block, and so critical word first was you return the requested word first, and then you restart, let the processor, you know, CPU restart the code, finish the load and continue executing other instructions. You send that requested word to the CPU immediately while you are loading the rest of the block. The CPU, here is the cache, and here is the next level, if you will. Okay, so what we said in this critical word first is, hey, you know, what you have is you start bringing in words into some buffer for the entire block, and then you return the critical word back to the CPU and you perhaps even put it in the cache. And then as the rest of the words come in, you fill it in with the cache and almost there. Okay, now model that you probably have had all along, or at least we've talked about all along, is say in a five-stage pipeline, or whatever the pipeline was, that hey, you know, when I have a cache miss, I have a stall, okay, waiting for the cache miss to come back, and nothing else, all the other instructions behind the load are waiting for the stall. Okay, that was our in-order pipeline, as you will. Once you get to the out of order, other instructions are executed, and if you let the load go, all right, other instructions that depend on the value for the load will start executing, and that may include another load instruction. Okay, and so what do you do when that happens? So again, first thing is go back to your traditional cache that you've learned all along. It blocks. When there is a load miss, it blocks everything. That is what now we would call a blocking cache, all right? If the cache operates so that it does not block when there is a miss, then that is what would be called a lockup-free or a non-blocking cache, and a lockup-free or non-blocking cache allows other accesses to while the miss is pending. Okay, so I have a miss, that's happening, and the CPU could be making other requests so it's not locked up, so it's lockup-free. Those other requests could include loads, and now we have a couple of choices. The load could hit in the cache. If the load hits in the cache, we would have what we call a non-blocking cache that allows a hit to occur while there is a miss pending. Okay, a more complicated scenario would be is hey, this load could actually miss in the cache. All right, so I am actually going to allow loads to miss while there is another miss pending. Or in other words, I'm allowing multiple misses to be pending at the same time, okay? It actually turns out, if you just simply go back to your little law, you know, analysis, is you have to do this, you know, when you have lots of instructions in flight and we'll come back a little bit to that analysis if I forget to remind you, okay? So this only makes sense where you have processors that can go ahead despite a cache miss, and these are all the out of order processors, okay? So how do we handle that? Even with this critical word first, is you must make the cache, this bus, and the memory cooperate, or the next level, shall we say, cooperate somehow, okay? And how do they do that? Okay, so the first thing first is this bus, the set of wires over here that's transferring data, you have to have what is called a split transaction. What that means is, you know, you send the miss to the next level, and then you let go of this bus. And now, so your request and response transaction is split, okay? So you let the request go to the bus, you know, to the next level, release the bus, when the response comes back, you get the bus back, and you carry on the transfer. As opposed to, you know, in the more networked technologies, also what's called a package-switched bus, as opposed to a circuit-switched, where what you do is you board onto this bus until the entire transaction is complete, which means only one transaction would be using that bus at any time. Okay, so far so good? All right, so now what we're going to do is you send the first load, it misses, okay? And you keep track of the load with a whole bunch of registers over here, which are called miss, status, handling, or MSHS, okay? So what this MSHR is going to have is, what this MSHR is going to have is, hey, for what load is this miss? Okay, so for what load means you have some kind of a load identifier of some kind, okay? You also need to keep track of the destination register for that load. So when that value comes, you can take the appropriate word from that block and give it to register R3, for example, the destination of that load was register R3, okay? Then, of course, you need to keep track of, just like we had in that critical word first, which sub-blocks are present in this miss, status, handling register, okay? Then you also need to keep track of when all the blocks come back, where in the cache should I place that, okay? So the destination block frame. So far so good? If I further want to do this miss under miss, I also have to keep basically the block data address of some kind. So what data block is this? This is the data block address corresponding to address 39. Data address 39. Why you need this is, if I have a load that is missing and now another load comes in and misses, if that second load is through the same block that already has a miss, then I need not send that second load to the memory to our next level. I will wait till the corresponding sub-block of that load has come back and then provide it. Are you with me on this? Okay. So, and, you know, I need to have, so let's do sort of a, you know, back of the onboard cache. 10% miss rate. Say I have a 10% miss rate. And say I'm trying to do eight instructions per cycle. And maybe I end up trying to do one load per cycle, if you will. Or two loads per cycle. And say now it's going to take me a miss latency of 40 cycles. So in 40 cycles, I'm getting two loads per cycle. If things are chugging along well, in 40 cycles I'm going to get 80 loads. If I have a miss rate of 10%, then I have eight misses in flight at the same time. If I don't, then I'm not going to be able to get that two loads per cycle period. Okay. And if these loads are to, you know, different blocks, then I need to have at least eight missed at-the-standard registers to allow those eight loads to happen. Eight misses to be overlapped at the same time. Are you with me on this? Okay. So these days processors typically have eight to 16 missed at-the-standard registers because you try and actually get streams of misses because also when I say I'm getting an average of 10% miss rate, okay, we did this calculation with 10% miss rate average, I need eight loads. But misses are never uniform over time. They come in bursts. So maybe I'll get 20 misses one after the other and then I won't get, you know, I'll get 180 hits. Okay, so you actually end up having to have more than this average that I just calculated. Are you with me on this? So yes, these non-blocking or lockup-free caches without these, yeah, processor, you build a big out-of-order processor, reorder buffer this, that fancy, very fancy branch predictor, that's going to be sitting around waiting for the result to come from the memory. Yeah. If you have a cache line in flight that you're there, you're requesting from the lower level and, you know, so you've asked for the critical block on that one, right, which is going to be, like, if you have another access to that same cache line, do you just have to now wait for the whole cache line or are there protocols to allow that to get a different critical block from that same cache line? Did everyone hear the question? What would you do? Well, the simple thing is wait. The complicated thing is send another transaction down and say, please put this at the head of the line. Or, or, or you just wait at this missed address handling register, but now this missed address handling register. Okay. So this missed address handling register is saying this load is going to register R3. Okay? Now the second load comes in. Do the same block and misses. So this missed address handling register, load one is going to R3. Load two is going to go to R7. It has to remember miss two. You are never going to let that go here. No. So either you block that load, you know, right over here or you block the second load and block everything after that. Or you let the second load, you know, wait at that MSHR and let others go behind that. What would you do now? Well, I guess it depends on how fast you can get this transaction down to the memory down below because the memory down below has fetched the cash line. Now it's just a matter of which ones it puts onto the bus next. That's right. So either you figure out that you have to do the, it's a request to the same cash line over here, you figure it out over here. And what I was asking what you would do is, you know, do you expect misses to the same cash line to happen close to each other? Yeah. Yes, you do. Because, you know, you get a data structure, you have different views on the data structure, on the same cash line, the loads to, fields and records that you have, situations like this going to happen all the time. So you do, you make an MSHR design more complicated to be able to handle more than one outstanding miss to the same cash line and figure out what destination registers should be for those multiple loads to return the correct sub-block, correct word that comes back to that particular answer. Does the memory subsystem return these critical blocks? Like if I get the middle block, or the fourth block, it saves, you know, 648 byte. If I get the fourth one, will it send me the fifth one next or does it start at zero and send them? It depends on how you design the controller, right? You know, if you're just saying, hey, send them everything from zero to N minus one, simple down control. If you are saying, now no controller, send me three first. Then you just, whatever the design is to how to send the others, you do it. Because it could be advantageous to send, like if I wanted three first, then send me four and five, then the compiler could go do something where it's like, I will access these and kind of address the order because I know that the next critical block should be arriving quickly. Yeah, the first one is the problem. Sure. Okay, so go back to 10 plus whatever it is. Plus 1111. Yeah, so it's the 20 or 40 to get the first one. And then the other is you don't want to, then just have more of a multiplicative stuff over there. Yeah, so I have one question that was kind of a follow-up to this. Let's say the first load came to a cache line requested critical block number three. And while the memory subsystem gave us that block, another load came to the same cache line requested block number seven, let's say. So do these, like, when it comes to that... Sorry, sorry. You mean word number seven, not block, word. Yeah. Yeah, sorry, sub-block. So cache line first miss, sub-block number three is requested. You return that critical block first, you get an early restart. Next miss you get for same cache line, but block number seven. But now build the controller now, stop its regular pattern filling, and be like, hey, I need seven. I need the seven first. Okay, okay. So load three came to three, whatever you did with it. When did seven come? Okay, okay. When seven showed up, by then that block would be here? In the cache already? Or if you said it showed up right over there, after that, okay. Okay, it could be here, but if it showed up right after that, it's not here, and it's here. I'm still waiting to be transferred over here. So you have to keep track of, hey, I have a load for one going to R3, and then a load two going to R7 over here. Then I have to have these, just like this, early restart over here. Remember, I had the bits with each sub-block around where the block was actually present. I actually had to have bits over here to track off whether the data has come back from the block into the MSHR or not. And the second question was, let's say we have two cache lines which are requested, like two independent addresses, but they map to the same cache line. Like three and seven? No, like a conflict, that's right. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. So to the same frame. Same cache frame. Then how does the MSHR... Because then you cannot exactly do a critical work. So again, again, again, all right. From here, they will go into the cache in some order. So the second one could either take this one out here. Okay. Remember, the MSHRs are also released in a certain order when the entire blocks have been transferred over here. Okay. Or you could decide to dump one of them in a victim cache. Or you could not have another. Or you could even stall when you have a list of the same. So many things to do. What is the... I do not know what the individual design is. Or anything that... These, I mean, these you will never ever see anything published, anything written, certainly no marketing. Hey, I can handle a list to the conflict in the three main set associated cache. That is a criteria I always use when I am shopping for a processor. You do, do not you? Oh, yeah, yeah. Okay. I think that is good. I do not care about clock speed. All right. About... Actually, that is sort of the frame conflict we talked about earlier. You also have to search the multiple MFHs to see if there is an outstanding miss to that same frame. All right. Think about this stuff for a while and read the original paper or actually a paper we wrote on this. They are fairly straightforward, easy to understand. The one we wrote actually has these littles law arguments to... You know, when we first started presenting the need for this people yesterday, everyone knows caches do not miss. So why are you worried about misses? Well, in real life, they do miss, and you want to have... When you are doing last-minute searching, you want to have all... So you have to make a little more kind of argument like I did. You have to have more thoughts than I did. Okay. Something else that is very common these days is pre-searching techniques. Where, you know, right now, we have only been talking about demand misses. When you actually make the load reference or the store reference, you actually have to miss. So in a pre-searching technique, you can anticipate upcoming miss addresses and bring those blocks into the cache proactively. You can do it in any other hardware or software, and the three things you need to worry about is you need to be able to initiate the pre-fetch sufficiently in advance. So if the latency is going to be 10 cycles, and if I initiate the pre-fetch only three cycles ahead, then I'm only, in a sense, tolerating three cycles of the latency. I still see seven cycles per okay. But if I do it 15 cycles ahead, timeliness is good. If I do it 100 cycles ahead, I may be replacing something in the cache that is going to be used in those 100 cycles. Okay? So there is the timeliness and the accuracy, which you don't only want to bring in data that you're likely to be used, because anything you bring in potentially evicts useful data, so you don't want to pollute unnecessary data. And then you want to, the coverage is you want to pre-fetch for as many misses as possible. So a very simple technique that people do is next block pre-fetching, where if you have a miss on address x, you also anticipate the miss on address x plus block size. So you pre-fetch the next block, if you will. And it works very well for instructions, because instructions, as long as you're in the same function, if you will, you are accessing consecutive blocks of instructions. Okay, so you come to the beginning of a function. If you have a miss, you might as well fetch all the consecutive blocks, next blocks, so you get all the instructions of the function in the cache. It also works well for data for arrays, and also, even for non-array structures, if you have lists of records or whatever it is, and the records you're accessing sequentially, if you will, which you typically would do when you're searching, et cetera. And this works well. This pre-fetching can either be done in software or in hardware, okay? And, you know, the software people always say, hey, you know, we can do things better. We can analyze addresses a little better, just like we did in trace scheduling. And yes, perhaps this is true, okay? But then, how do you act, how does the software actually convey what to access? So there is what is referred to as a binding pre-fetch. Binding pre-fetch means the pre-fetch actually happens. You can't ignore it, in a sense. And that is what actually would be a load, a typical load. You're just issuing the load way ahead in advance, just as we tried to schedule it, okay? You don't need ISS support. You need to use normal loads. But, of course, now, as you know, the whole point of pre-fetching is to bring in things that you're likely to miss. So, in a sense, the pre-fetch is like a mess. The pre-fetch is not something that's going to enter the cache. And so each one of those pre-fetches is a mess. And so you have to have multiple messes if you're doing multiple pre-fetches. So you have to have a non-binding cache, okay? And you also need more registers. And then, of course, you go back to what the same issues that we saw in trace scheduling. What happens if there's an exception? For a non-binding pre-fetch, you are pre-fetching it into the cache only. You are not changing any state, if you will. A register of a state. Loading something to memory is steady. If you're just saying, hey, have the side effect of bringing something into the cache, the cache is an architectural, visible state. It makes the program go faster. It has been used for speculative execution attacks because you're having the side effect of bringing data into the cache. But other than that, it's not binding. So you can basically work into the piece of code. You can actually have pre-fetch instructions like here. The issue with these pre-fetch instructions over here is, again, now, they're an instruction of some kind, which means they're in the iCache, which means they take up space in the iCache. So there is a complex trade-off about the benefit of having a pre-fetch instruction and doing it in software. Plus, that array address is not free to compute either. That array address is not free to compute either. Actually, interestingly, I did not... I just came across this the other day. I hadn't been looking at it too much. These are the CPUs that I told you about, and there's four CPUs I have. The data is the MD75. Actually, it has software pre-fetch of even instruction lines into the cache. How do I use it? I don't know. But, you know, how I was using it. But these days, with the code footprint being so, the code footprint being so big, and iCache is being such a huge issue, a lot of people are interested in pre-fetching techniques for instructions. So they have actually a pre-fetch instruction for bringing instruction. You may actually have that a little late. I think Intel has had that since 2014. I've used that instruction before. You have? Yeah. How do you use it? It's like you just pass it the address. I know you pass it the address, and it'll fetch the admin. How did you meaningfully use it? Oh, it was in this software renderer where I would fetch the next line of this big frame buffer, where I started drawing triangles there. That's data cache. That's data cache. That's not instruction cache. Oh, now it's fetch instruction cache? Oh, that's the new one. Fetch data cache has been around for a long time. I'm curious to know how you use this fetch instruction cache, because it's not that simple. You have to have a fair amount of analysis and someone to do that. What happens if we have an unlikely branch called an iCache miss while the pre-fetch is already holding the resources for the iCache transfer? Can you repeat the question so others can hear that? What happens when we have an unlikely branch while causing the iCache to miss while the pre-fetch instruction is kind of hogging the resource, the memory to cache lines resource? Do we load it and then remove it back or do we prematurely stop it, and cause more alignment problems? What would you do? The faster solution is to flush that cache line from my end, whatever the memory is saying does not matter, and then tell the FSM to go back and do what I want it to do. But that's a priority. Alternatively, you could be, in a sense, tracking which of the pre-fetches for what you have misses in. And if it's the same, you stop over there and wait for it to come back. That's slow. It's not slow. You only have all these structures that handle outstanding misses. So that would just simply be a miss on a line for which there's a bending miss. But an iCache miss causes more basic work, in a sense. A dCache miss is fine because we only, let's say we have data accesses every 20%, so we still have 60% of the out-of-order processors still chugging along. An iCache miss would mean everything stops. The misses have happened anyway. Your question was, if this happened and there was already a pre-fetch that is bending to it, what do we do? This part is not bothering the processor anyway. This is operating on its own. This is just saying, hey, these are the number, these are the lines for which I have misses and are standing. I don't care if it's data or instructions. A miss comes with the same line. Not overnight. Just wait until it comes back. Send it back. Yeah? What that pre-fetch I would probably be really good for is usually you have, like, before you make a system call, you usually do a lot of processing. You might do a system call to do a log or a system call to dump a bunch of data to disk. And that system is probably not cached at all. So if you know you've done a bunch of loop processing, a couple of iterations before you do the system, probably just pre-fetch it now. There are a lot of scenarios where you can see how this would benefit. Okay. But, you know, I mean, those are, in a sense, a little more obvious ones. Because, hey, I'm going to call, forget the system call, just any ordinary call. Hey, I'm going to make this call, start pre-fetching from this part over here. Okay. But in general, you know, going beyond that, and what is the framework for doing some of this and actually using it and actually not having these instructions. Remember, not only do they take instruction cache slots, issue slots, they take all the other slots in the pipeline. And how, you know, what is the balance between having too many instructions that are not doing anything productive other than pre-fetching, which can actually be very beneficial, you know, taking issue slots to build it. So I don't know. I haven't seen too much work on this, but there likely will be probably someone trying to figure out how to make use of these instruction pre-fetch instructions. This is a very small side question. Since these pre-fetchers are like fully just side effects, they don't actually adjust the state at all. Could it just exist outside of the general, like, distraction? Like, these are intercepted early? Did everybody hear that question? What would you do? Exist outside? So how would it work outside the main? What would this be? Where are its registers? What is it? How does this code execute? Does it even need to actually have the correct value? Could it just grab the value as it exists in the canonical file and just say close enough? Yeah. Well, later on we will see, when we get to multi-test a little bit, is we'll see how we can run multiple threads on the same processor and how we will share many of the backend resources. We have separate frontend, but many of the share backend resources. And what several people have done work during us is how to actually have a separate thread derived from the main program thread. This does things like figuring out outcomes of branches. So, you know, if you take a look at, hey, you know, if you take a look at have a piece of code and the piece of code that goes into determining what the branches go, that slice of code determining branches is much smaller. It's not the entire program. So pulling that out, maybe 20% of the code, and have it run independent, separately, you know, it actually has a few more to benefit. Same for data, and in a sense, same you can do for construction pre-fetches. But there is still the overhead now. You have to have your own state, if you will, et cetera. And as I said, as I said repeatedly, it's never this or this, okay? This is your bag of tricks, and in some situations, some of the bag of tricks work better than others. Other questions or comments? Yeah? When these instruction pre-fetches start showing up in the kernel, then we'll know it's valuable. When these instruction pre-fetches start showing up in the kernel, then you'll know it's valuable. I, you know, I mean, I don't know what goes into move kernels. Some of you probably know better than that. I thought you would never try to craft a kernel for a particular machine had specific instructions at only a particular architectural machine or support. You try not to do that. Well, but they have a bunch of, I mean, there's a whole bunch of assembly code in Linux, right? Platform-specific assembly code. Whatever. Okay. All right. There's Linus Trevellos, I think that's the same name, Trevellos? Trevellos, yeah. He has this famous rant on C move, and how he hated it so much, and I thought it was the right one, like the early 90s. Oh, okay, and so they actually used it, and then they... Oh, no, he got really angry and said he would, like, stop anyone who tried to use it for a while. So here's something else that is really true. People find out there's this feature, and a lot of smart folks, they want to say, how I can try and do the best, and let me show my friends how I did better than them. That's good. And figure out ways to use this. Yes, there's a lot of that. Which makes everything go wrong. Good. All right. Okay. So in hardware, you know, you can do, you know, what to prefetch, one block ahead, or you actually, these days, you can keep track of correlation between addresses. You have to have, you know, very complex tricks to get your prefetching in. You know, the processors typically have a variety of different... They have typically n-block look ahead and many other tricks that they use. The other question comes is, when to prefetch? Do you want to prefetch on every reference you make, on every miss you make, or actually, what the object, you know, what you would like to do is, hey, as long as I have data in the cache that is useful, and what does it mean to be useful that I'm going to reference in the near future, then I'd like to not replace that data. Okay? But once I get to a point where that block I'm not going to reference in the near future, and the block is dead, then I'd like to be able to replace that. And then because if I prefetch something into that block frame, it's not costing me anything, because it's not replacing something that's useful. So there is a whole bunch of work to actually trying to predict dead blocks. And many of these predictors and trackors actually end up being much bigger than the cache size. But, you know, at some point, sometimes, you do things and you use some, some set of them. You know, there's also correlation predictors where if you miss on an address, then they remember the next bit as well. And, you know, techniques that go down link, left, and jump pointers, and we did a film on that. But, you know, what exactly tricks people use, sometimes they tell you. Samsung actually had a very nice paper where they talked about all the tricks that they did in their high-end processors. That team, Samsung doesn't build, disbanded that team, but they went on to do many of the other designs, including some of the ones that I keep showing you. Okay, so, so far we've only looked at loads, reading data from the cache. What about writing data from the cache? You actually start having many new issues. You have, how do you carry out the tag and data access? Then we have write throughs and write back, write allocate versus no write allocate. And then we have things like store buffers, write buffers and write back buffers. Okay, so here was our cache. What happened for the read? We read the tag and the data in parallel. If there was a mismatch, the tag didn't match. We read some data that was the wrong data. Ignore it, no big deal. Okay, for a write, I cannot do the tag, read the tag and write into the phrase in parallel, because if the tag doesn't match, I have clobbered the old data that was there in the data array. And if I have an associative cache, how do you know which way I'm going to write it? So you first have to know that you're going to have to have a hit in the cache before you write the data into that corresponding frame of the tag. Alright? So writes end up being a two-cycle process. In the first cycle, you match the tag. In the second cycle, you write to the matching way of the tag. Are you familiar with this? So in the first cycle, you're going to check the tags to see if you have a hit. If you have a hit, you advance the store pipeline. If you have a miss, you stall the store pipeline. In cycle two, you write the data into that matching data array. In a more advanced technique, you would actually decouple the write pipeline. In the same cycle, what you would do is you check the tag of store i while you're writing the data of store i-1, and you're also bypassing the data of store i-1 to other nodes. Because what you have to have now, what you have to have in the cache, here's the CPU, and I'm doing the store. Okay? So I have to match the tag in the cache, and while I'm matching the tag in the cache, the data for the store has to be stored in some buffer. If there is a match, it goes from here to be written into the cache. Okay? It could happen that while I'm doing this right, I get a load which happens to be the same data. That's the load. That's going to... Then I have to bypass this data to that load. Because the load went to the cache, then it would get the wrong data. Are you with me on this? Like the first cycle is this tag access. We could increase the associativity of the... You could increase the associativity of the cache to do a store. No, I'm saying that since... How and for what purpose? I just saw that if we are using two cycles, then the problem of having a larger associativity that you would have to do so many things. Yeah, so many things. But you know, it would be nice if we only did store for cache. It would be nonsensical. You actually have to read stuff. I just did one cycle here. If it reads, you can do the tag access and data access in parallel. That's the whole point. So this entry that you just drew, isn't this essentially what our load store queue is doing? Hold on. Okay, please. Okay, all right. So you've all known about write-through and write-back caches. Write-through, you write the data immediately. It's conceptually simpler. And on a miss, there's a uniform latency because you simply have to go and access the next level of cache. But it requires the additional bandwidth. Write-back, you have to keep track of whether the block is dirty or not. You all know this, right? If you don't, then stop me, all right? And you use the lower bus bandwidth so that typically lowers the bandwidth for large caches because you're only writing back dirty blocks. But now what you have is you have a uniform miss latency. If you have a clean miss, which means you don't have to write anything back, you only have one transaction from the lower level, if it's a dirty miss, you have to write back the block that you're replacing and then fill it. Okay? To avoid this latency, what we will do is we will carry out this write-back not to the next level, but put it in a buffer like this, and that we will call a write-back buffer. Carry out the fill of the cache line, and then, independently in the background, write that back later on. And we'll see that in a bit in detail in the next slide. Okay? Two slides from now. A very common design is write through L1, write back into L3. Why so? When we talk a little bit about multi-level inclusion that we will see, this saves a little bit on dealing with coherence. Then, the other thing to do is, what if I have a write miss? Okay? Write miss, I'm missing to a block that's not in the cache. Should I bring the block in the cache so I read the entire... Remember, if I'm having a write miss, I'm only having a write miss to a word. Okay? Do I read the entire block and bring it into the cache? If so, I have what is called a write allocate. A write allocate policy actually decreases read misses because it's likely that I'll be reading other words in the block. Okay? But now, you're also bringing in data that you may or may not use. And you typically use a write allocate policy if you have a write back cache because, you know, you bring in the whole block, you keep in the whole block, and you may read it right away. Or, you could actually choose not to bring in the block into the cache or write no allocate policy just right at the next level. Here, I'm not doing anything about reducing read misses. It's using less bandwidth because it's only... I'm not carrying out any run reads. And typically, if I have a write through cache, since I won't have to write it through anyway, I end up using a write no allocate policy. Okay. Now, let's talk about a variety of properties. We saw in detail these store keys. Store keys are part of the speculative processor. Everything, all of this, is transparent to the architecture. Okay? And it's holding speculatively executed stores. And if an exception occurs, you can roll back the store. And it's used to track load store dependencies. The next type of buffer is this buffer that I just talked about, is this write buffer. This write buffer is now actually holding the state for a store that I'm committing that I'm just trying to write into the cache. So it force committed architectural state. And I need it to be transparent to a single thread. It may affect this memory consistency model. I'm not going to go into that in this class. What that is. And what it does is it allows you to hide the latency of the memory access of, you know, some of the cache. And what you have to do is if you have a match, you may want to bypass the value to later loads or store. Okay. Now it comes in coming to your question. Remember our store queue. Our store queue was some array of some kind. Here was the store queue head. And here was the store queue tail, if you would. All right. And now what I'm saying is, now what I'm saying is that, hey, the store at the store queue head I'm committing, so I'm updating this store queue head to the next entry. And I'm sending this to the write buffer. Okay. And when I send something to the write buffer, I send the address of the tag. And I may have to bypass this to any load that needs that in the buffer. So part of the store queue actually would serve as a write buffer. Okay. In fact, you could have a multiple entry write buffer with a write buffer and write buffer tail, if you would, that could all simply be part of the same physical structure. And these days, in these practice processes, that's pretty much exactly what it ends up being over here. Did I answer your question? Yeah. And in fact, the nice thing about doing this is, hey, you know, you're already having bypasses that you need to make from the store queue to the loads. And so, very similarly, if you want to bypass from this write buffer to the load, which is what you wanted to do over here. Okay. We'll be doing that very naturally. Okay. The next buffer set of buffers is a buffer between the cache and the next cache of the memory. And that is a write back buffer, which ends up being a special case of a victim buffer, if you would. Again, it's transparent to the architecture. And this is used to hold the dirty block that I'm evicting from the cache. So what I would do is I would evict a dirty block, put it in the write buffer over here, put in a new block that I was referencing into that block frame, and then, over time, values would go from this write buffer and would be written into the next level in a sort of decoupled manner from anything that's happening. Again, this is transparent to the architecture, logically, you know, do that. This and this actually ends up being part of this multi-process of coherence. I'll briefly introduce you to the last two lectures, but not talk about it much in this class. Yes, sir. I assume there's some level of prediction for when's the best time to sort of do that massive write back. There's some level of what? Prediction. No, there's no need to do any prediction here. It's very simple. Okay, so what's happening is that, look, you know, so there is this bus over here, this wire. When those wires are available, I'm sending stuff over. If I have a read request come in, a cache miss come in, I decide that that would be higher priority. Typically, it is. So I let that go. But not before I compare the write buffer to see if that cache line is there. In which case, in which case, I'm not sure I want to do bypassing over here, so I just let that write happen, write back happen, then do the load. Okay? So we're taking, I'm going to spend more time.
