Title: 752_Lec3
Source file: 752_Lec3.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

and read those counter to measure certain values, okay? But, you know, you can get some gross measurements, but you do not know what's happening in need at a cycle level. These are very useful, by the way, to actually find you code and so on like that to understand what may be going on, okay? But, you know, it's still, you're doing it at a much more gross level. What you can also do is you can use cycle level micro-architectural simulators. So you can actually simulate the execution of the program in a software simulator, okay? Like GemFi, or GemSem that you will use in this class. It's not as detailed, not nearly as detailed as some kind of GemFi, but it gives you, you know, still a reasonable amount of ideas of the many important things that you do. So what computer architects have to do, or micro-architects have to do, is they routinely use simulation, okay? To try and understand, you know, how a program would execute on a particular micro-architecture. What would happen? I can simulate what would happen if I have a 32 kilobyte cache. I can simulate if I had a 64 kilobyte cache and a six cage pipeline with, you know, whatever, okay? So you can do, simulate these things. The negative of a simulation is it is orders of magnitude slower than the actual hardware. Okay? And typically you would need to run thousands of simulations, studying different parameters, okay? So despite all that, this still ends up being sort of the method of choice that is routinely used to try and evaluate stuff. Any questions so far? So this course, you know, we are more mainly talking about improving CPI rather than the block frequency. Historically, the, you know, we talked a little bit about more, now we see a little bit more, okay? The process technology improvement. That has accounted for, you know, a majority of the overall performance improvement, okay? And to do that is basically have faster and faster clocks, which means do less and less work in each clock cycle, which means have more and more pipeline, okay? That is historically where it's happening, okay? Now, you know, but that does not continue forward. That doesn't go, you know, it's reached a point where it's, the clock's not getting faster anymore. Your transistor's not getting faster anymore, and DCY a little bit, okay? So there are other techniques that you have to use to try and improve. What else can you do to get performance? You have to improve the CPI. So this is the set up slide for the different processor that I gave you a little while ago. You have a link? This is AMD talking about how they are getting their performance improvement, okay? So they are getting, you know, for Zen 3, you know, they have got a 19% IPC, okay? Newer processor CPI benefit over the previous generation. Next generation, they're getting 14% more. Next generation, 16% more. They aren't talking about the clock, but it's the clock period is the same. Very similar. Not much performance improvement over there, okay? So, you know, that's where, you know, for a while you can go down that faster transistor, faster, you know, clock period, but, you know, eventually start having to do different things. In fact, if you're getting performance improvement going forward, it's almost certainly gonna have to come with CPI improvements, so improvements in IPC. So we'll talk a lot about these, and now what helps is the bounty of transistors. The more transistors that you have, the more you can use to come up with clever techniques to improve the IPC. So things, you know, that you could never even contemplate when you had 100,000 transistors or a million transistors. Okay? Or 10 million transistors. Just sort of become routine now. So, you know, I remember, I remember, some of you may have done this too, because you still teach it, you know? When you take your, you know, hardware logic design class, you talk about building an add-in, integer add-in. You know? Okay, and you talk about how many gates is this add-in taking? You've done all of that, right? On the terms of, you know, does it take in so many gates or does this design take so many gates? And, you know, it used to be the case that you actually build an add-in with multiple tips. Build an ALU with multiple tips, okay? Then you worried about the cost of these gates, okay? And, you know, it's like, and so, you know, these days, you know, after that, okay, yeah, one ALU you want, I'll give you 10, 20, 100. You can have those if you want. No big deal. Compared to the transistor budget I had, it's not taking that much more, okay? And, in fact, you know, there's, Chris Rowan, who was one of the co-founders of MIPS, then went and did a couple other companies and then they had a process of design that had 300 cores in it and, you know, and the core that he would have is the CPU core is now the new transistor. It's like, in the good old days, you would worry about saving transistors, or, you know, the transistor wasn't that big a deal and so that you can have, you know, integer ALUs, no big deal, okay? So you have lots of transistors, but, as you will see, you know, power and energy start becoming an issue and then we'll see, you know, a little bit how the impact of that comes. Before we go further, I want to talk about sort of two rules of thumb, if you will. And, you know, these are both what is widely referred to what a lot of people say is common sense, but, as you all know, common sense is not very common. You know, and many a times, just get caught up and forget stuff, okay? And the first one is Amdahl's Law. And Amdahl's Law was first formulated by Jean Amdahl, who was actually one of our alums, built the first computer in the state of Wisconsin, actually was first worldwide, and then went off and did IBM's 360 architecture, and then went off and then, you know, started Amdahl computers as a competitor to IBM, okay? It's actually very interesting in its oral history, if you take a look about it, how we got it, you know, grew up in South Dakota and got a fellowship, war fellowship to come over here, and then how IBM actually had recruited him, and, you know, it's very interesting, but he used to come to our alumni receptions, so we have several pictures of them in Silicon Valley. So, but, so, so Amdahl was, you know, doing his uni process of Amdahl machines, and at that time, you know, DARPA, DOD, you know, they were funding the ILIAC, which was a huge multiprocessor, 70 multiprocessor, we'll talk a little bit, maybe talk about vector processor, we'll talk a little bit about that, and so this was in the 60s, even then, everything was going to be parallel and uni processor were going to die, not going any further, okay? And Amdahl came up with his very simple, you know, rule of Amdahl's law, saying, look, you know, if you have a program, and you can speed up a fraction X of the program by a certain amount, and the other part, you cannot, so there's a fraction that you can parallelize, execute in parallel, and speed up by parallel execution, and the remainder fraction, you cannot speed up at all. What is the overall speed up you can expect, okay? So, you know, the speed up, the speed up you're gonna get is, you know, the fraction of the program that you can speed up, the time it's gonna take is that fraction divided by the speed up, and one minus that fraction is not going to be sped up at all, so that's the time it's gonna take, okay? So if the old time that the program took was one, the new time is this fraction is gonna stay the same, this fraction is going to be sped up by this much, so the speed up is one over this, okay? And, you know, if I have a fraction, say five percent, that is sped up by infinity, you know, sorry, if I have a fraction of five percent, that can be sped up, even if I speed it up by a factor of infinity here, make it take zero time, 95% isn't sped up, the best speed up you can get is still only five percent, okay? So, basically, you know, the point being is do not ignore the non-parallel part, because you have to make that go faster, too, and these whole techniques of making uniprocess will go faster, or even if I have an application that I can do a lot in parallel, okay? Then, but it has a sequential portion, the overall speed up I'm going to get is still going to be limited by that sequential portion, okay? So, I think that you've all seen this Amdahl's Law stuff here before, but this is sort of a very important thing that people routinely forget, okay, coming up with designs. Now, another, you know, rule of thumb is to design what is called a balanced system, okay? So, what system balance is, if I have a system with different components in it, okay, each one of them has certain capabilities that I'm, you know, designing certain capabilities, okay? The capabilities of each component should be equal to the capabilities that other components ask of it, okay? So, if the capabilities aren't matched, okay, then I do not have a balanced system, there is no point in designing something to provision more capability than others are going to make use of, okay? You're just wasting money in that case, okay? So, you know, if you have designing a processor that it's like, hey, you know, everything is going, assuming that it can execute, you know, operations at a certain rate, and that requires fetching data from memory at a certain rate. If the memory has a capacity rate lower than that, the processor is not going to be able to execute at the rate that it's capable of, okay? So, in a balanced system, you have to make sure that all the capabilities, in other words, that, you know, if one resources operating is going to saturate, the other should also be saturating at about the same time, okay? Any questions about this? That's, you know, if you want to have a balance, means there's certain other parts, yes, you aren't going to have all of a sudden a more capable one part, because it's not going to work as well. Because the other, we're going to hold it behind. Now, of course, you know, typically you have a little extra here and there, but, you know, anytime you have extra capability, it means you're paying extra cost. So, this is another, you know, Little's Law. Little's Law, it's actually a very simple equation, which says, you know, if I have a system where requests are coming at a certain rate, okay? Okay, and the system takes a certain amount of time to service a request, okay? How many requests are going to be in the system at any given time, all right? So, what the Little's Law says, the average number in a system is the arrival time rate times the average holding time, all right? So, you know, one of my colleagues likes to age his wine and was wondering how big a wine cellar should he have? Okay, and okay, so if you are basically drinking four bottles of wine a week, means you have taken four out of that system, that cellar, and of course, you know, one to all, so then the input should be the same, right, okay? Otherwise, the cellar depletes. And if he wants to age the wine five years, okay? So, the number of requests, bottles in the cellar should be the arrival slash departure rate, which is four bottles per week, times 52 weeks per year, and the holding time is five years, so he needs to build a cellar this thick, okay? Closer to home, closer, you know, relevant to even the people who don't drink wine and want to build wine cellars, you're all here at UW Madison. You know, three chance for a go, a chance for John Wiley, he was an engineer, and he had this, he, everything he, not everything, a lot of things, he would analyze at little slide, okay? So, there was a huge push to increase the number of undergraduate students to admit into the university, okay? So, he did his engineering calculation, saying, hey, you know, you know, all of them are gonna have to take their introductory classes, you know, chemistry and math and so on like that, and you know, that's not, you know, we don't necessarily have the capacity to do that if they took their introductory classes two years in the junior college somewhere, so they only spent now three years in the university rather than four, okay? We can then increase the students, okay? Number of students, we can increase the arrival rate if the holding time goes from four to three years while still having the same number in the system, okay? And then, where are these people gonna stay? All right, so that's what you can say, look, we just don't have the housing capacity around here to have that many students. Out go the engineering, canceling, or tax coming economists. Only thing to understand is money. More students, more tuition. Where are they gonna stay? Not my problem, okay? Haven't they even more? So, whatever, okay? So, but you know, so this is, this little law and something that you all are experiencing, all right? How does that relate to what we are talking about, okay? So, you know, if I want to design a processor that can access memory at, you know, a rate of five gigabytes per second, and the way it's accessing memory, it's going to have a cache miss and it's gonna bring in a block from memory to the cache. A block is 64 bytes. And the latency to service a miss is 100 nanoseconds, okay? So, how many requests must be there in the memory being serviced, okay, if you will? So, the requests in the memory are gonna be the arrival rate, times in the system. So, I'm trying to do five gigabytes per second. These are cache blocks coming in, each record, you know, and they're 64 byte blocks, so I'm making so many requests per second. Each request is taking so much time, so I must be able to handle at least so many requests in the memory, so I must have the cache. I need to be able to handle, basically, eight cache misses at a time. This is the kind of analysis that allowed, you know, me to argue many years ago, we needed caches that allowed multiple misses, whereas the whole Silicon Valley was operating very differently at that time. Pretty simple analysis. If you just do it, you can get a much better solution than someone who's not understanding that, okay? And so, that is an average. Typically, you need to design your system to be more than that, because things rarely happen at a constant rate, okay? There are ebbs and flows, okay? Any questions about these? Now, let's go back to technology, okay? So, we talked about some of the, you know, the CPI and all of that, and we'll go back to that in gory detail later on. Let's talk a little bit about transistors and technology. Transistor speed, power, and reliability, okay? So, the transistor, we can see the transistor characteristics and scaling them back in the switching speed, power, and reliability, and, you know, and talk about, you know, a little bit of the delays. And in your undergraduate architecture class, you probably learned that, hey, you know, how do you calculate the delay of the circuit? You have a number of gate delays and how many levels of gate length logic you take, and if each level has a delay e, then levels times d is the delay through that piece of logic, okay? Reality, in a sense, unfortunately, is not that simple, we'll talk more about it. Okay, so, this now is a view of, we talked about the semiconductor process, all those masks, doing different stuff and depositing it and stuff like that. This is now the side part view of the actual chip, okay? Silicon vapor, oxide insulator, silicon, you know, insulator, these are the transistors, these are the vias, okay, the tungsten vias, and these are the wires, okay, on different levels in the third dimension, all right? Can I ask a question? Go ahead. Is this a real picture? This is a real picture. So, what's in the void space here? Is it just, is it really just empty air? So, here, when we have copper wires, this is actually a barrier, which you know, sometimes, that prevents the copper ions from getting into the substrate, okay? In the time of the tungsten wires, there was no need for any of that, yep. And so, it was just open like this. I mean, if we could get down to being the microns tall, we could walk around in here? Oh, you could. Huh, okay. I just figured, I always assumed there was something left behind that they built up on top of, but. And it is. I mean, this is a diffusion barrier, all right? This is a diffusion barrier over there, so. But if you deposit stuff and you etch stuff out, you know, I mean, you know, that stuff. I just assumed they filled it in, because how do you get that wire, that top wire there to kind of breach the gaps then? Because, so, the top wire over here came about a hundred times. It was sitting on photoresist at the time. Yeah, yeah. Okay. No, this is remarkable. Semiconductor technology is just remarkable, you know, what people have been able to do. And again, it's, you know, it's like, hey, there is a lot of money at stake, and so then, people innovate. Okay, so, you know, this is now another side picture of the IBM process with the six layers of copper wiring. These are the vias and timescren stuff, and these are the copper wires. We'll talk a little bit more about this now, some of these now. Okay. So, let us, you know, talk about now a simple timing model, a simple RC to A model. So, we talked about, you know, transistor driving some other circuit, a gate driving, another gate system inverter driving two inverters over there. Okay. And, you know, what is the time that it's going to take to go through this four people video, switching time. So, the switching time, the time when the input, this goes from one to zero, and the output goes from zero to one, you know, and the next one goes from one to zero, there is going to be the resistance, okay, which is going to depend upon the material of the wires, the length of the wires and the cross-section of the wires. We'll talk a little bit about each one of these. There is a capacitance, which is going to depend on the material, okay, the area, okay, and the distance. And then also the voltage is going to impact the speed. The higher the voltage, the greater the swing, the faster you can be. Okay, the greater the swing would be one and zero, the faster you can be. Okay, one is the supply voltage, zero is near ground, not quite ground, but near ground. So, what is the resistance? The resistance is going to be, now, you know, you go from here, the resistance is going to be the resistance of this gate over here, the channel, resistance of this wire, and this is going to be also a function of the gate voltage that you have over here. The capacitance is going to be the source and the brain capacitance, okay, all right. And then the gate capacitance is that this is driving over here and the capacitance of the wires, okay. So the capacitance that this gate is going to see is going to be the capacitance of the gates that it is driving over here and the wire, okay. So a simple RC delay model, okay, is going to basically be proportional to a resistance times capacitance. That's going to be the delay over there, right. So, you know, let me ask you a question. I have two circuits, one is one inverter and then one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, you know, these eight over here at the next level. And here I have one gate here, two gates at this level, four gates at this level, eight gates at this level, which is faster. Why, no, why? Less capacitor, less load on the, oh, right, sorry. I've been teaching my students wrong there. I've been telling them, hey, this has two levels of logic. This is faster, two levels, here is one, two, three, four. No, yeah, but this is faster in undergrad, okay. In the real world, this is faster, okay. Why so? Because this is driving so much capacitance over here. All right. And this over here, each gate is driving only two other gates over here. Seeing much less capacitance, okay. So the RC is going to be small, all right. But then there is also these wires that come into the picture, right. So this is undergrad level delay calculation. This is more the real, this used to be the real world. Life was good. Unfortunately, the real world starts getting complicated, you know. But that's what keeps people in jobs and well-paid jobs too, so. All right. And so what happens is when you have wider transistors, they have lower resistance and they also have more drive. The drive is the amount of current a transistor is going to be able to supply to, you know, charge anything else, and the more drive it has, the faster the transistor is going to be. Okay, now let us take a look at some ramifications. Of that very simple delay model. So if I want to have a faster transistor, if I want a faster circuit, I reduce R, I reduce C. That's what I do. If I want to reduce R, I want to have, you know, wider transistors that have lower resistance and I want to have shorter wires. If I want to reduce capacitance, I want to reduce the number of connected devices. Okay? And I also want to reduce the capacitance, less wide transistors, okay? Because less, the width of this transistor, here there's more capacitance here. The smaller the collective capacitance, this seems to be here, to drive this and calibrate this way. And I want that short wire. Okay? So we keep this in mind. We'll come back, okay? So now let's go back to a, sort of a more regular picture of wires, unlike this one, unlike things like this, okay? And talk about a few things. So here is a source of the transistor, drain, the gate, okay? And lambda is sort of called the feature size of the technology, okay? And the transistor has a certain length, okay? So here is a three-dimensional view of that source, drain, gate, length of the gate over here, okay? Width of the gate over here. If I shrink the transistor length, there is a smaller channel, shorter channel, so the resistance of the channel goes down, okay? And the gate and the source drain capacitance goes down, goes down, okay? But then also the drive of the transistor goes down. So if I want to have a bigger drive, of course I have to have a bigger transistor. Let's talk a little bit about wires. So I have wires. They have some rectangular cross-section, rectangular-like cross-section, okay? All right? And so they have a height, they have a width, and then they have a length, all right? So the resistance of a wire is going to be dependent upon the resistivity of the material, the length of the wire divided by the cross-section area of the wire, all right? So the bigger the length, bigger the longer the resistance, more the resistance, the lower the resistivity of the material, the lower the resistance, okay? Tons from higher resistivity than copper, copper is going to have lower, you know, if I can build a wire with copper, it's going to have lower resistivity. And therefore, for a certain cross-section and length, lower overall resistance, okay? The capacitance depends on the geometry of the permissivity of the dielectric, as well as the geometry of the surrounding wires, okay? So if I want to reduce resistance, lower resistivity, smaller red, larger height, larger width, okay? If I want to reduce capacitance, increase the separation between wires, and hire a material with a lower k dielectric, okay? This is now a representation of multiple layers of wires, representation of multiple layers of wires, okay? The transistors are over here. And what you're going to see is, hey, you know, these are the tungsten vias, these are wires in this level, wires at this level, and so on like that. What you see is, you see the cross-section of the wires at this level be smaller than the cross-section of the wires in the upper level, okay? Which means these are going to have more resistance, which means we are only going to run them for smaller lengths to maintain the resistance, okay? So for wires that need to go longer distances, while still being fast enough, the way they're going to lower their resistance, their length of reach, the way they're going to lower their resistance is increase the cross-section area at that level. Okay? When you have a die size of a certain area, okay? If I have a die size of a certain area, this is the area of the die over here. If I have wider wires, I can have fewer of them. I can have fewer of them. If I want to have more wires in a layer, in a given area of the die, they have to be less wide, okay? So in the layer where I have lots of wires to connect nearby transistors, I'm going to have less wide wires and shorter ones to maintain the resistance committee, okay, the overall resistance. In the upper layers, I can have more wires, wider, I can, sorry, I can have wider wires and thus fewer wires, and this is where I will need fewer wires overall. Okay, to make up for the increase in length, all right? So parts are good? So the RC of the wires, the resistance is proportional to length, capacitance is proportional to length, so basically the delay of the wire is going to be quadratic in length. And so what you typically do is you actually have to have repeaters that you basically have to, that effectively reduce the length and the capacitance of this, and then you have another transistor then going ahead and driving that to make the length of the wire. Okay, bring it back to the linear delay. Now let us see how technology impacts RC delay. What does scaling do? Scaling helps reduce the wire and gate delays. Why? Because wires become shorter, so length decreases, so resistance decreases, okay? Wires surface area becomes small, so capacitance decreases, okay? Transistors become shorter, resistance decreases. Transistors become narrower, capacitance decreases, but then the resistance decreases, you know, because it's short times narrow. The height times width is basically the resistance, if you will, impacts the resistance. But it can also increase the wire and gate delays. Why? Because wires have become narrower. Okay, the cross section of the wire became narrower, so the resistance decreases. Wires become close together, okay? So then there are the resistance of the impacts of the wires coming close together. Please, just putting them close together, that messes with capacitance, not the resistance of, doesn't? That messes with the capacitance. It does mess a little with the resistance, too. I mean, this is quantum effects happening, or? Like, because, okay, we'll talk a little bit, okay, hold on to that part for the, okay? Because temperature starts also coming into the picture, okay? Why temperature? Because power density starts increasing. That affects the resistance. Sure. Okay? Thank you. Thank you for asking that, yeah, okay? I should have been a little more with that, why is that happening with that? Okay? This means the wires become smaller for the capacitance starts to increase. So, how do we, you know, improve RC delay? So, for one, you can use different materials. The decrease of resistivity, use calc for the spread movement, use lower dielectric insulators. Okay, and this is what people have done over the years to improve the performance, okay? People, okay? For design-wise, you use bigger cross-section, but the bigger cross-section is gonna increase the area. Okay? Typically, that means taller, otherwise you have fewer of them, okay? So, you know, typically you have more taller, okay? Except on, especially, you know, you have taller over here, and then as you go more, when you have fewer in the same area, you can have more wider too, okay? So, typically taller always have fewer of them. And, but you need more layers to that increase the fabrication power. But you also increase the surface area and the capacitance, and therefore the capacitance. You can use wider transistors. If you have wider transistors, they take more area, but the resistance goes down. And it increases the capacitance, because your capacitance goes up. So the capacitance that someone who's driving you sees goes up, okay? And then, of course, you know, you need to increase the power. So, again, you know, this is just to sort of give you a bird's eye view of the different competing parameters that are happening. Now, the next factor. We talked about speed, transistor speed. We saw a little bit in the transistor speed. Now let's talk a little bit about power and energy. And then we'll talk a little bit about the light energy before I go into this. So, power is also now, is an important concern too. Initially, for a while, it simply used to be, hey, you know, I have a lot of, you know, power that I have to dissipate, okay? And it's generating some amount of heat, I have to dissipate that heat. Okay, and how do I go about dissipating that heat? Okay, and you can have different cooling systems, and fan, and whatever, liquid cooling, et cetera, et cetera, okay? But these days, you know, given that you have so many devices connected together, data centers, I have hundreds of thousands, okay? Over there. There is a dollar concern too. When it was all distributed and you only saw one person's computer, okay, fine, you take a few extra watts, I cool it, no big deal, I have a few watts. So this adds up. More important, I think, there is a related metric, which is the power density, which is the number of watts per square centimeter. Because what that does is, okay, it gets you into this thermal cycle, where as the power dissipation goes up, the power density goes up, temperature goes up, the resistance goes up, the power dissipation goes up, okay? And then of course, you have to bear the costs of all the packaging, et cetera. Energy is also concerned, especially if you're having a device that lives off a battery, okay? There is a battery of a certain capacity, energy capacity that it can hold and that's going to then determine how much energy you drain from that battery is gonna determine how long you can keep that system going. And there should be, low power implies low energy, but it's not the other way around, okay? Low energy doesn't necessarily mean more power because you can expend that power on you. Power is energy per unit time and this full-time power can be quite high, okay. So, I mean, this is a data block of the power density of different processors and these days it's even much higher. I mean, I think the, from what I heard, is some of the newer Nvidia GPUs, they are running one and a half kilowatts, okay? And that adds up pretty quickly. Okay, so technology impact, we saw a little bit, you know, bird's-eye view of that on the delays. Let us get an idea now of what are the sources of energy consumption in the circuit? Why so? Because then we try and see how in our design we can tackle several of those energy sources to try and have our energy consumption under control, okay? So, if this is a circuit that we had, you know, we had the circuit, okay, there is a dynamic power component and a static power component. A dynamic power component happens when the circuit is switching, okay? The static power is consumed even if the circuit is just sitting idle and not doing anything at all. It's awake, but it's not doing anything. The dynamic power is going to be typically mostly expended on charging the capacitance. So, if there is an overall circuit, that circuit has a capacitance of C and is operating at a voltage of V, the energy spent for transition is half C squared, okay? Okay, so if I have, you know, say this is a transistor over here, okay? This is a gate, okay? Typically, a design is going to have many gates. So, the overall dynamic power is going to be the power of each of those gates switching, each of those transistors switching, okay? It's going to be the summation of that, okay? So, now you can say, hey, if I ask you, how am I going to reduce dynamic power, static power? Well, yeah, reduce V and reduce C, and then reduce. We'll keep that in mind, okay? There is a short circuit power also when, you know, both P and N transistors turn out, which ends up being a small percentage of the active power. The static power is what is also called sub-threshold leakage power. I mean, the important component is the sub-threshold leakage because transistors don't turn off completely unless you actually turn off the power to them, okay? So, we are sitting there, and so what you, and still, still taking some power, you know, burning some power, and the amount of power is that the static leakage is going to be dependent on, we'll see a little bit what it depends on, and, you know, what are the issues in dealing with some of that. Okay, I'll go to this slide, and then I'll come, you know, we'll stop over there if we have one minute left. Now, scaling is generally good for local power. Why? Shorter wires means, and smaller transistors, length goes down, capacitance going down. Shorter transistor length means resistance goes down, capacitance goes down, okay? So, per transistor, the power is going down, okay? But, I'm having many more transistors, okay? So, I end up having, spending the same power budget. However, the effect on power density is largely negative because the transistor and wire power increases linearly, however, the density increases quadratically, as we saw, okay? With strengths, high strengths, okay? And thus, the power density increases linearly, okay? We'll come, we'll talk about this slide again next time, when we're finished as well. And, we control that somewhat by reducing the voltage, reducing the, not somewhat, we control it a lot. So, okay. Any questions so far? We'll come back about this slide again next lecture, so hold off on the questions on this one. Other questions? Okay, we'll see you Wednesday then. BDD, does it come into plane C, V squared, right? Like, in the half C, V squared, this BDD is what is, how long, like, what about the source and gate? But, you considered only BDD for the main power source. BDD is the main power source, right? Now, okay. So, what is VSS? Nothing? That is drain source. Oh, that is VSS? I said something like VSS. VSS is something like... Broke our 10th chapter of interconnecting in single class. What did you say? Broke our 10th chapter of interconnecting in single class. Yeah, that is why I probably found all of this very boring. Broke it, bro. I just felt sleepy. Bro, even I felt sleepy. Thank God. So, he must have seen me sleep through today. Five, five, five. He's telling that only. Five, five, five. Seven, five is the first one. Everything. Seven, five, five. Everything happened until now it's seven, five, five. Tomorrow, we'll get more trouble. Oh, it's just two or three slides more. That's it. Like, by the way, Ometogara's teaching is this way only. Huh? Ometogara's teaching is this way only. Question 265. Ah, no, bro. He's trying to scare us. Oh, he's trying to make people leave. Oh, he heard we ask questions. Yeah, wait. He came to class. He asked questions. I mean, he asked questions, but not this frequent and not this, like, you know? Everyday. Everyday, line to line. He'll ask questions. Like, randomly.
