Title: 752_Lec5
Source file: 752_Lec5.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

anybody have any questions about compatibility? The new processor must run the old program. So the program is written in the instruction set. The old instruction set, if you will. Okay, so the difference between the old and the new is you're trying to not have some support for some instruction that was there in the old instruction set. And upward compatibility means old processor must run new programs. So you've created a new instruction, but you want to run the program on the old processor, old generation that does not support that instruction. Okay? So what do we have to do, and what do we have to keep in mind? And the point being is that, you know, make sure that the path to compatibility, forward and backward compatibility, is not as onerous as it could be, is that you need to learn forethought. And there's always a temptation to, hey, you know, I can put something in the instruction set architecture and get a little performance development. And many a times, you know, that thinking is driven by what is it I can do today, or, you know, in the near future? What is the technology going to let me do in the near future? And the technology changes, and the capabilities are very different. What you thought was a good idea in that generation, the potential gains, they disappear. And you can actually end up going to a loss, okay? So, you know, I mentioned a few lectures ago, like, you know, the people, you know, doing these designs, these architectures, you know, they're some of the brightest folks, but they tend, many of them tend to be, you know, get caught up in their own little thinking, and then they end up being spectacularly wrong a few years later, okay? A couple of examples, I'm going to go into, you know, register too much into this, where, you know, we, every time you call a procedure, you, you know, save and restore instructions, and they had a clever idea to save, avoid the save and restore of those registers, okay? And those instructions, and, you know, by doing something called res windows that I won't talk about much, okay? But it worked out great for that generation, but as technology advanced and you start going to out-of-order processors, the implementations became a nightmare. And this was one of the reasons why some micro systems could not keep up with the processors as they, you know, come up with good out-of-order implementations, because this really created a lot of complexity for them, and, you know, they no longer exist. Okay? But this is perhaps also something that allowed them to have that selling point when they first came out. All right. Another example, and we've talked a little bit more about this when we talk about pipelining, is delayed grant instructions, and, you know, this came about, and we've talked about, you know, you've seen high-sized pipelines before, and we'll talk a little bit more about that just to learn review, okay? This was proposed to basically reduce branch costs in a five-stage pipeline, and the thing was, hey, you know, we're never going to have all processors in the future. They'll all only have five-stage in-order pipelines, and we have multi-processors, and, you know, complex single processor, and, you know, uniprocessor, and we will see this creates a lot of problem when we start doing multiple instruction issue at a time. Okay? So, what we can, you know, the way we're going to deal with these forward and backward compatibility issues is two things. One is a trap instruction, trap operation, okay? A trap is, hey, you know, the processor encounters something that is out of the ordinary, so it says, I can't do anything, then you go to the operating system to take care of it, and then perhaps come back to the processor and restore execution of the program, okay? Another is a no-op operation, so it's an operation that does nothing, okay? So what we're going to do is we're going to make use of these two concepts, a trap and a no-op, to try and see how we could go about getting compatibility, making compatibility a little easier. Okay? So what we want to do now is we have an opcode like the insert into queue instruction, which is not very, it's rarely used, but you have to support it, and it's going to be complex to implement, so we'd like to get rid of it. In the word they use, they create their instructions, okay? So how do you do that, okay? What you do is that, you know, in the new implementation you're doing is you say, hey, you know, this opcode for the insert queue instruction, it's now going to be a bad opcode, okay? And when the processor encounters a bad opcode, it's going to go to the trap handler to deal with a bad opcode, okay? And in that trap handler, you could take a look at the bits of the instruction and say, oh, this bad opcode is really an insert queue instruction, implement that insert queue in low-level software, okay? And then return from that trap, okay? The difference between implementing that in hardware versus low-level software, is it's going to be slower, perhaps much slower, okay? But that's okay, since very few, it's very rarely used instruction, okay? So this is widely used, is, you know, cleanup, mistakes of the past, if you will. You have an instruction you no longer want to support. The same trap concept, what you're going to use is, you know, what we're going to do is we're going to reserve a set of trap codes, okay? And now, when you create a new, when you create a, you know, want to have a new instruction, it has an opcode. It runs well on the hardware on the new machine, that's what you do it for. But now you want the same code to go around on the old machine, which does not have that instruction, okay? So what's going to happen is it'll see a bad opcode, okay? When it sees a bad opcode, okay? It'll go to a trap handler. So what you do is you give the, you know, the old machine a firmware patch, okay? Which is the trap handler, okay? And that's a lot, that's what you can do to try and, you know, add the new instruction to that code. Are you with me on this? Okay? And, you know, sometimes you want to have, people have proposed to have, you know, hey, I want to have some hints in the program, like a prefetch instruction, for example. Okay, that's just sort of, you know, not doing any work by itself. It's a noop. So what I can do is I can reserve a set of noop codes, okay? And don't define the uses that you can then carry out different hint operations for different noops, okay? Now, one of the other things that makes it perhaps a little complicated to do something like this, something you have to watch out for, is that, you know, you have bits of the instruction. Let me just go forward, okay? Here's a mix instruction set. We'll go to it over here, you know? And, you know, there are different fields of the instruction and, you know, if there is an other, you know, so there's an out code field, a register field, source register, two source registers, a destination register, maybe a function that you do, and then there is a field that talks about, you know, how many bits to shift the, you know, operation by shift, okay? So if I have an add operation, these shift bits are not used. Okay? So if the shift bits aren't used, I can say, hey, you know, these are don't cares, all right? What's the big deal? If it's an add instruction, these could be don't cares. I'm not using those bits. Okay? So here's the problem that sometimes happens. Okay? So, and it has happened, is like, you know, some clever programmers say, oh, you know, these bits of the instruction are used, and you know what? I'm going to maybe save some memory space by storing some constant value in there. And then, you know, I'm not taking other memory space for that constant value, for example. Okay? So what happens is that people, if they see some unused bits in the instruction, they try and do some cleverness, and then they put something, you know, valuable in there. Okay? So, you know, say I decided to put some constant value of 3 or something like that. All right? Okay. Now, if later on I use, I want to add something in the instruction set and use these bits and that particular value 3 for a new opcode or something else, all of a sudden the programs aren't working. Okay. Are you with me on this? Okay. So whenever there are unused fields of the instruction, don't ever, you know, define them as don't cares. Always define them as a given value, because otherwise the trap cannot use those unused values for new instructions. And the same happens, you know, if I have special registers, you say these bits aren't needed. No, you make sure you define them to be a certain value. So the implementation, if, you know, if those bits aren't the zero value in the implementation, the implementation is going, I mean, it's not going to execute that instruction correctly. Okay. Are you with me on this? So, you know, these are, this is how we maintain compatibility forward and backward compatibility, and these are things that you have to watch out for, because people did, like I said, did have, you know, you know, people like to be clever. Okay. So, you know, you throw in some cleverness that comes back and bites you, you know, many years down the road. Okay. Now, what I want to go and briefly go through different aspects of an instruction set. Again, you know, and I repeat again, why we want to do this is because people may not be next year, may not be five years from now, but certainly in your career. Okay. They're very likely is going to be someone, people coming up with new instruction sets, and many a time, perhaps forgetting the lessons. Okay. And so, if you have an opportunity to do that, then you shouldn't be making the mistakes in the past. Okay. So, we'll talk about the one moment model, then the format of an instruction, then the operand models, data types and operations, and control instructions. Okay. And we'll basically be, you know, I'm going to use examples of the MIPS instruction set simply because it was one of the cleanest instruction sets. And the RISC-V, the latest RISC-V shares a lot of similarities in the MIPS instruction set. Okay. ARM was designed earlier than the MIPS ISA, and ARM was designed at a time when, you know, hardware was, you know, more constrained. And also, you know, the hardware at that time, you would have an ALU, and then you would have a barrel shifter at the end of the ALU. Okay. So, you know, you could do an arithmetic operation and also do a shifting operation to help. That time, you didn't have hardware multipliers. You did the multiplying software. Okay. So you could add and shift when you had to do for a multiply operation. So in the ISA, there's a shifter. There's a shift with each instruction. Okay. So, you know, sillyness like that. So, okay. So the instructions, the implicit model that has been used for all, I should say, for most, well, I would say all architectures that are pervasive, okay, rather than these special verbal features, okay, is what is referred to as the von Neumann model. Basically, what you do is, the model is, is, hey, instructions are in memory, okay, and processing is done in the CPU. So I have to fetch instructions from the memory, process them, go and fetch the next instruction. And repeatedly, carry out this loop, which is, I'm going to fetch an instruction using the program counter that points to the address of the instruction in memory. And I'm going to take a look at the bits of the instruction to decode it, what the instruction is, get the inputs of the instruction, carry out the operation, execute, write the output, update the program counter to get the next program counter, and repeatedly, keep executing this loop until I'm done with instructions, I have no more instructions to execute. Okay? So, the program counter, you know, using the program counter, what we do is, we define a total order of the dynamic instructions. Okay? So, I'm fetching the instructions from memory, and in the order that I'm fetching them is the dynamic execution order. Okay? And the address or the PC of the next instruction, the PC value of the next instruction is going to be the PC value of the current instruction implemented by the size of the instruction. Okay? Unless the instruction itself says to change the PC to some other value. Okay? Very simply. Alright. Further, each instruction is going to name some storage elements it's going to operate upon. Inputs and outputs. Okay? And the name of the storage element and the order of the instructions define the overall computation. Okay? So, a value is going to flow from instruction X to instruction Y, Y as storage element A, if and only if, X names A as the input, sorry, as output, Y names A as the input, and Y occurs after X. Okay? And so, the processor will repeatedly execute this loop. People have proposed alternatives and actually have designed special purpose machines. In fact, you know, a few years ago a company built special purpose data flow machine to execute some financial application and so, you know, some of the hedge funds would happily pay millions of dollars for that machine. It's a very limited market. It's not sort of a very pervasive machine. Okay? Alright. So, now what we're going to take a look at is several other aspects of it. You know, the format, operating model, data operation control, one by one. Okay? So, first let's take a look at the, what are the issues that go in the length of the instruction. So, these days, you know, MIPS or ARM or REST 5 or Spark or, you know, PowerPC, whatever it is, you know, they had fixed length instructions. Okay? If I have a fixed length instruction and the length of the instruction is four bytes, then getting to the next PC is very straightforward. It's just four. I don't even need to take a look at the length of the instruction. Alright? So, it's a very simple instruction and implementation where you compute the next PC only using my current PC plus the length of the instruction. However, you know, you are taking a lot of bits to do some even very rudimentary simple operations. So, say I want to implement an X by one. I'm taking 32-bit instruction to do that. You know, a x86 that uses I can do that with just one 8-bit instruction. So, if I have variable length instructions, I can actually get good core density. If I all have fixed length instructions, the core densities are very significant. Okay? On the other hand, if I have a variable length instruction, I don't know what the length of the instruction is. So, I have to use the PC to get the instruction, then take a look at the bits of the instruction, get the bits of the instruction, take a look at what the instruction is going to be, to figure out the starting address of the next instruction. Okay? That makes a little more complex implementation. So, if resources are limited, that's difficult to do. Okay? So, as I mentioned a couple of lectures ago, you know, the first microprocessor, limited amount of memory, core density was important. Okay? We started out with variable length instructions, like the x86. And once, you know, if you have an instruction set and it happens to be successful, and people actually write programs, you know, using a instruction set, then that stays for a long time. Okay? In IBM's case, they're still running code that they, you know, for the instruction set so, you know, and then, then memory started becoming a little bigger. You know, I mean, the original Windows was defined, I mean, the original PCs had 640K of memory. That was sort of the model that you had. Okay? As memory sizes increased, okay, especially for PCs and for memory. So, you know, core density maybe not, is not that important for that case, for my PC situation, my workstation situation. Okay? Yes. And, you know, you know, and then, again, along comes mobile processor where, again, everything has to fit in basically, you don't have that many chips, you know, all this other stuff and so on like that, you know, I may have a fair amount of area, you don't have that in a phone. Okay? The space doesn't exist. So, and of course, the cost problem, you know, the point is much smaller too. So, I have to have a smaller amount of memory. And, that is what pushed the ARM people to have the thumb instruction set. They were already, you know, in the mobile devices. Okay? And, that MIPS trying to get into that market then also came up with a MIPS 16 bit model. Now, what the process, you know, you're implementing the model and then you fetch an instruction and, you know, we all see instruction nicely on the board and so on like that. But, basically, what the problem is, you know, if I have a few simple encodings that is going to simplify this decoder implementing. Okay? So, I'm going to give you sort of the example of the MIPS format to illustrate that point over there. So, in the MIPS instruction set there are 32 bit instructions. Another is an I type, which is used for, you know, branch instructions, mostly, but also some other instructions. And there is a J type over here, which is used for jump instructions. Okay? And, you know, so the decoder is given a set of 32 bits. And, the first thing the decoder does is the format says that's what the opcode is. That's where the opcode is. Okay? And, once by taking a look at these first 6 bits, it goes how the remaining 26 bits should be interpreted. Are those, is this opcode, do those 6 bits say it's a J type instruction, but these are another register, and these 16 bits are an immediate value? Or, do these bits say, hey, there's an R type instruction in which case this is one source register, this is, you know, a target register, this is a destination register. And by the way, I may want to have more of those operations. You know, define those operations. And, you know, and for some instructions, if I have a shift instruction, these bits are going to be some shift mark. Okay? So basically, the decoder is just taking a look at some of that stuff and seeing, you know, what's going on. It makes the decoder for the hardware much more valuable. That said, that said, and this is, you know, something that I still have an image of and I still have an image of the hardware and the hardware and the hardware and the hardware and I still have an image of this in my mind, even though it's from almost 30 years ago. So, you know, there was an event at IBM research in Yorktown Heights where, you know, John Cock and all the other pioneers who had done the IBM 8-1 instruction set, the processor, and, you know, it run fast, ran faster than the other processor, even though it had this very ugly instruction set, okay, and the other people had this very nice speed instruction set, hardware decoder, easy, and so on like that. Okay, so, Mike Blaskin is one of the movie pattern. Have you, any of you ever seen that movie pattern? So, it's basically, you know, about George Patton, the famous World War II general, and, you know, and Rommel was, you know, a German general, very famous tank general, and there's this, and movie starts out in the battle between Rommel's tanks and his tanks, okay, and he's winning, and he says, Rommel, you magnificent bastard, I've read your book, okay, so I've learned your tricks, and I can play them, all right? So, what the, you know, if you have a complex instruction set with nice encodings, what the, and people said, hey, if I have these nice encodings, I'm going to might decoder as simple, okay, but what they did instead was, they had resources, transistors. With those transistors, you can build some cache of some encodings, pre-decode them the first time you encounter them, store pre-decoded versions in the cache. So now, as you're executing the instructions, you pre-decode them once, and then you don't repeatedly have, every time you see them, you don't have the complexity of the decoder, okay? All right? So, you know, you know, take from some other field or other environment and adapt them to your own. Figure out how you can take those concepts and, you know, apply them to your situation. Okay? So, encoding, few simple encodings, simplify the decoder implementation, now, where are the operands for the instruction coming from? Okay? Remember, everything is starting out in memory. Data is in memory, instructions are in memory, on bringing them to the processor, CPU to carry out the processing. Okay? So, one model is, hey, the operands are all in memory. Storing data, storing operands. Okay? So, if I have that, then, if I want to carry out the computation, A gets B plus C, then, all that I have to do is, I have a single instruction, which says, you know, add, you know, bring B from memory, bring C from memory, into the CPU, because I have a single instruction, doesn't make the work of the instruction simple. In fact, this instruction has a lot of work in it. Okay? You have to figure out the address of B, read it from memory, bring it here, figure out the address of B. Okay? It's not very useful or practical. What I want to do, is, going out to memory to get data is expensive, takes time. If there is data that I'm using, model that has been proposed and actually implemented and, you know, with great success is what is called an accumulator model, but what you do is you just have one storage element called an accumulator inside the CPU, all right? And now the same calculation where I'm going to add B and C, which are both in memory and store the result in A in memory, I will first bring the value, you know, read the value from B from memory and put it in the accumulator, then add an instruction which adds the accumulator to the value from memory and then an instruction that writes the value of the accumulator back to memory, okay? It's sort of like having a single register, okay? If I do that, then I, instead of one instruction now, I have three instructions. Now this one instruction is going to be, take more bits because specifying each one of these is going to take more bits and we'll see a little bit of that, okay? But, you know, here I'm going to have three instructions where each instruction will be perhaps less wide than the other one, okay? But I still have, I still have instructions. Another model where I'm going to say, hey, the operands of the instruction are going to come from a stack, from the top of the stack, you know, top two elements. If I want to carry out an addition operation, the addition operation, what it does is it reads the top two elements of the stack, pops the elements of the stack, carries out the addition and pushes the result back on the stack, okay? So now what I'll do is I'll read from memory, push it on the stack, that's push B, read C from memory, push it on the stack, okay, and, you know, increment the stack pointer in each one of these as part of the push operation. Then the add operation has no operands, no explicit operands because the operands are implicit because they are the top two elements of the stack. And I add them and store the two sources of top two elements of the stack. The definition is the top of the stack, okay? And then if, you know, I have a pop instruction, what it does is it reads, pops the top element of the stack and stores it into it, okay? So I have four now, instructions here, okay? And each, the length of each instruction it needs to have at most, you know, one memory operand. This model has also been actually quite widely used, but use a fair amount, you know, and, you know, stack architectures were quite, they have been used in many specialization machines, okay, and they're probably still things in devices that you use that have these stack architectures. And the next model is, look, what I'm going to do is I have a bunch of memory addresses, okay, memory locations. Each one has an address that I'm storing data. But now I'm going to have another address space, okay? And that address space is my register address space, which is going to have a few elements, okay? You'll see what the number of elements, what that means, okay? And that's what I'm going to store some data into. Keep it, you know, you know, keep data that I'm using, you know, using in the near future or frequently in that, in that storage space over here, okay? So then what I'm going to do is now when I need data from memory, I'm going to read it and bring it into, you know, sort of a register over here. There are two incarnations of it. One is what is called a general purpose register architecture, where for each instruction, one of the operands could be in memory. Here, both the operands could be in memory, and it was a problem. The definition also in memory, okay? And this one, in this one, one of the operands could be in memory, okay? And, you know, and the other is in a register, okay? So here I would read from memory location B and store the value in register one. Here what I'm going to do is I'm going to register one, to the contents of register one, I'm going to add a value that I read from memory location C, and then I can store the result back in register one. And then finally I'm going to have an instruction that stores the value of register one into this memory location, okay? So here now I have three instructions. Each instruction over here, you know, I'll need to have at most one memory address that I need to specify. Questions? The, and this, by the way, is, you know, like example of this is the IBM 360-370 that is still widely used. The next version is what is called a load store architecture, where the concept of the load store architecture is, is any operation, you know, any ALU operation is carried out only on register operands, okay? Unlike this one where one of them could be in memory, okay? And further, that, you know, there is a set of instructions that reads values from memory and puts them in a register, and there's a set of instructions that writes values of registers into them, okay? So the former is what is called load instructions, and the other are store instructions. So, you know, the same calculation, first I would load V into register R1, then load C into register R2, add register R1 and R2, write the result in register R1, and then store register R1, okay? So now I have four instructions, but importantly, only one class of instructions read values from memory. Only one class of instructions writes value to memory, and the instructions that carry out computation, they only have operands, inputs and outputs that are in registers. Okay, now let's take a look at the pros and cons of these models. And there is no, there's never a situation where one is better than the other, you know, category better than the other, okay? Because it depends on the situation, you know, what you're maybe trying to get where one may be better than the other. Let's take a look at three different metrics, okay? First is the static code size. The number of instructions needed to represent the program and the size of each instruction. If I want to decrease the static code size, any time I specify an operand explicitly, it takes bits. So if I have my operands on an implicit, the code size is going to be smaller, okay, and I want to have high-level instruction. So, you know, this accumulator ISA, pretty much all the operands, one of the operands was implicit. This accumulator operand was implicit, okay? Here all the operands are explicit, okay? So, you know, the accumulator architecture typically has the best code size, followed by the stack, and then, you know, the general code, especially load store. Here now, you know, for example, I've got three instructions with this size. Here I have four instructions this size. The size of these instructions are going to be equivalent at, you know, at a first order. Another metric is data drive, okay? I remember when I first encountered a, you know, processor, it had the notion of what is called a wait state, okay? What it was is, the expectation was, you edit an operand from memory, took only one cycle, and the wait state was if it took more than one cycle. The wait state was one, two, it took two cycles to get data from memory. These days it takes 200 cycles to get data from memory, if you're lucky, okay? So, what you want to do is you don't want to keep going out to memory that often. And also, also, these days, typically, not these days, as they do for quite a few decades, is that the CPU is on a chip. Memory is on a different chip. So, to go from CPU to memory, you have to go from one chip to the next, to another chip, okay? And then there are, you know, the interface of the chip, the pins and so on like that. They are a valuable resource, okay? The bandwidth of that resource, you know, if I keep data more in the CPU, then I have to make less use of that bandwidth of that resource. Okay, so the number of bytes moved to and from the memory is the data memory traffic. What we want to do is we want to have many long lived operands in on-chip storage. So, with the load store architecture, with lots of registers, I can get more storage on the chip than, you know, other order GPUs and the general corporate register of stack and the accumulator ends up being worse in that context. Because I'm, you know, if I have like a stack architecture, you know, both those operands are in the chip on the stack. Whereas in the accumulator, one of them, you know, is constantly, you know, having to go to get data to and from them. The third metric is the CPI. What we want to do is we want to have instructions that take smaller number of cycles to execute, okay? And the number of cycles that it takes for the instruction to execute depends on how much work has to be done to process that instruction, okay? So, if I have this memory on the architecture, first, there's one instruction, one instruction, okay? But in that one instruction, first I have to calculate the address of memory, C. Fetch C from memory, which many years ago, it would take one cycle, now it takes 200 cycles, okay? Calculate the address for B, fetch B from memory, carry out the operation, calculate the address from A, then store the A back into memory, okay? Much more work will take many more cycles for instruction, okay? If I take a look at this one over here, you know, this load, I'm going to calculate that address in B and C, how we can do that fairly simply, and, you know, and then fetch B, and if the B is in the cache, then the number of cycles is, you know, not that bad, you know? So, only a simple address calculation in B will see that, you know, what that simple means, okay? And, you know, so the amount of work done in each instruction is very small. So, the CPI ends up being lower. Okay, remember our performance equation, you know? Cycles per instruction times number of instructions times clock cycle time. So, the number of instructions may be more, but the CPI is going to be less than here. So, load store has a, you know, technically lower CPI than the general purpose of the register of similar stack than the cumulative. Okay, any questions about this so far? So, from what we've talked about this, we say, this is good, and it's good to keep data in the CPU, the processor, and I'm keeping data in a register, so I want to have lots of registers. Okay, how many registers should I have? Well, there's a big trade-off over here, and what are the parameters in that trade-off? The first is, register faster, because there are a smaller number of them, and they're built with SRAM, okay, which ends up being faster. But SRAM takes much more area than, you know, a DRAM equivalent chip, and different processes, of course. So, I can have fewer bits, so I have to have fewer registers if you will. Okay, second and more importantly, I have to give the address of a register if you will. Say, which register? This is register R3, okay, I need to say which register it is, and the address of the register, if you will, I'm going to have to specify as bits in an instruction, okay? So, if I have more registers, I need to have more bits in the instruction, all right? So, more of them means larger register specifiers. They add, you know, fewer registers per instruction, or I have indirect addresses. Let me go back to this, instruction over here. I have 32 bits over here, okay? Six bits, I have 32 registers, six bits for this R code. Five bits here, five bits here, five bits here. Okay, okay, so that's 15 plus 21 bits here, and then I have five bits here, and then I have six bits over here. If I had 64 registers, okay, I'd need six bits here, six bits here, six bits here. All of a sudden, if I want to keep the other fields unchanged, I have to have a 35-bit instruction, okay? That doesn't make sense. I have to compromise on how some of the other bits are used. Okay, are you with me on this? Okay, more of them means larger specifiers complicates how I create instructions. Further, not everything can be put in registers, okay? If I have an array, you know, and then arrays can be there in memory, I just can't store, you know, that stuff in registers. And, you know, if I have things, you know, that are pointed to and so on, it becomes a little complicated. So not everything can be put into registers. Further, the more registers I have, okay, if I have a context, what is the context? Okay, so I'm running a program, okay, and then I have to, you know, say I, you know, have an interrupt or a trap or something like that, but I have to stop doing this program, go do something else, and then come back and start doing this program. When I'm running this program, this program has some notion of state of the memory, and the state of the registers, and the state of anything that it needs, okay? And now, you know, when I have this other program running on the same hardware, it's going to use the registers of the hardware, unless it has a separate set of registers, and we'll get to that when we talk about multi-threading, okay? So these registers for this program need to be saved, okay? And when I come back to this program, they need to be restored, okay? Where do I save them? Okay, that's a separate issue, okay? And so more of these, more register I have, more saving and restoring I have to do, okay? And typically, they will be saved on top of a stack. Where is the stack? It would be typically in memory, okay? Now, cleverness, cleverness. People came and figured out, hey, you know, spark register windows I briefly mentioned, hey, you know, the way to save these, you know, this is actually not for, you know, save the, this was more for procedure calls and returns. It is where you had a whole bunch of registers and, you know, 128 register window, and then it was like divided into sets of 32, and then there was overlapping would be in source, and whatever it is, you know, ugliness like that, okay? But the more registers I have, the more I'm going to have to save and restore, okay? So, you know, the x86 started out with the eight registers. The rest are cutters like MIPS were to 32 registers, and this was done in the mid-80s, late 80s, and then in the late 90s, mid-90s, and 90s, you know, culminating the late 90s, Intel had their IA-64 architecture, and they thought, hey, you know, and we see some of the techniques we're going to use when we get to wide issue. They require lots of registers. Yeah, software techniques, lots of registers. So, they had 128 registers, okay? You know, so, you know, we would ask these guys who are pushing that, oh, how about saying something that's too, eh, oh, you know, hi, no, no, no, no. Okay, so, you know, anyway, all right. Any questions about number of registers? Again, just, you know, giving you, you know, the idea of the issues that come about when you're dealing with things like that, all right. The next is, what is the virtual address size? You know, when you say you have an n-bit processor, okay, what does that mean? And what that means typically is you support a virtual address size, a virtual memory size of two to the n bytes, okay. So, you know, machines started off initially as eight-bit, you know, and then they're 16-bit, and then, you know, the big deal was the, you know, 386, I think it was the 386 that had 32-bit architecture. Yeah, 386, 32-bit architecture, and interestingly enough, okay, these days, like, you know, like, x86 has 64-bits, you know, the ARM has 64-bits, and, you know, they have, but they all, they start, you know, in the ARM, they were 32-bits when it first came out. Now, what happens is that, you know, when you start off with a certain bit, again, you know, code is written, you know, with, assuming you have a 32-bit address space, that you need, when you, you need to continue to be able to support that as you go along. Will we have more than 64-bits? Not in my career, but likely in yours, we get to architectures that have more than 64-bits. Now, like, actually, it's a very interesting story, is that, you know, when x86, 32-bit architecture, okay, people at that time thought, hey, you know, 32-bit is, you know, two to the 32, that's four gigabytes of memory, and, you know, the memory at that time was, you know, if you got to 16, 32 megabytes, that was a big deal, you know? It's like, hey, you know, you're not gonna have more than four gigabytes of memory, but no, no, you know, the scientific guys are always, no, you know, we need more, or whatever, yada, yada, yada. And so, so Intel, they were doing the IA-64, and that was going to be the architecture for floating point and 64-bit address space, and they were never going to have the x86 for 64-bits. Okay? And so Albert Yu, who was the senior VP of all projects, had basically said, we are not gonna do a 64-bit x86. Albert sits in Santa Clara with a team in Oregon. And so, remember I talked about how AMD even got to be alive, and so the AMD folks said, you know what, we are going to do a 64-bit. That's how we're gonna survive. We don't have whatever the volumes of Intel, we want to give solutions to people who want the 64-bit space. So then the Intel guys, they actually took the AMD stuff, and they built it into their processor with basically a mode that's saying, whether you have it there or don't have it there. Albert was always told, no Albert, you're right. IA-64, the Intel 64-bit solution, we of course, as you say, are not doing 64-bits. Except when they're alive, and you do say, oh, Albert, we're just gonna flip this bit. It's all gonna work. And that's exactly what happened. So again, high-level execs in some of these companies gave them great demonstrations of infinite stability. You know. But, okay. So the next thing I want to talk about is address invokes. How do you specify the address of data? I have a 32-bit architecture, okay? I have a 32-bit architecture, okay? And say I have a load instruction, so I need to get a 32-bit address to get data from memory, okay? So if I specify in this load instruction, okay? If I give the full address of B in the instruction, that takes 32 bits, okay? The operand, the opcode is taking six bits. This register is taking five bits. That's 32 plus 11, that's already a 43-bit instruction. So there is no way I can specify, if I have a 64-bit machine, that's 64 bits for the address of a data instruction. There is no way I can specify the entire address of data in the bits of an instruction, okay? So what I can do instead is I can specify some formula in the bits of an instruction, which I can use to calculate the entire end bits of the address of the data, okay? And that formula is what is referred to as an addressing mode, okay? So what are the variety of addressing modes people have? And what people have tried to come historically what they said is, hey, you know, I'm gonna have an addressing mode that sort of matches some idiom that I'm having in my high-level language. Okay, I'll leave it for you to figure out which ones these might map onto. So one addressing mode is very simply, look, in the bits of the instruction, I'm gonna specify the register number, okay? So if I have 32 registers, I'm gonna take five bits in the instruction to specify the register. Then, when I am, the way I get the address, I read the contents of that register. That is, if I have a 64-bit machine, a 64-bit address, and that's the memory location I read from, okay? Which I want to bring to the page. The next is a displacement addressing mode where what I do is I specify a register, read the contents of a register, add to it some other value, and that other value is what I'm gonna call an immediate value, and I specify that immediate value in bits of the instruction, okay? That's why it's called an immediate value. I can have another formula which says, hey, I'm going to, in my instructions, specify two registers, R2 and R3, for example. Then you add the contents of those two registers, and that's my address, okay? And auto-increment, a memory-interact addressing mode where what I do is I specify a register, okay? Read the bits of the register, that's the address, read from the memory location, the bits that I get back, that is an address which I use to go and get the data, okay? And another formula which is, hey, I'm gonna give the register number R2, read the bits, get the memory, read from that memory location, and also increment that register, okay? So, you know, I mean, this is nice, these are helpful where, you know, where if I'm just scanning through a string of characters and moving it somewhere else, okay, read, you know, pointer to the next character in the string, increment the pointer to be the next character in the string, and so on like that. And you're saying, hey, why can I not do this in two instructions? First is do this read like, yay, why do I need this auto-increment addressing mode? And then I have a separate instruction for doing this, and you're right, you can do that, okay? And, you know, machines started out with this auto-increment addressing mode, and they weren't using it, so people figured out, hey, you know, now that's not needed, okay? But then, now, as you try, you know, with this, basically, you have one less instruction, and it's frequently used in our thing, and you're getting smart enough that people end up using it, going backwards, okay? And a couple of other interesting modes. So, again, the point over here is, look, I need to come up with a clever way of, you know, specifying the formula in the instruction, the bits of the instruction. Questions? So, you know, and in MIPS, they basically have, you know, only a displacement addressing mode where, you know, load and store instructions are in this high format, so you have a 16-bit immediate value, and you add this, what you do is side-extend it to be, you know, 32 or 64-wheels, okay? And add it to the contents of this register, and that ends up being the addressing mode, okay? And they came up with this because, you know, they did a quantitative analysis on a lot of programs and found out, you know, what these values are, and they found out that, hey, you know, if I have this 16-bit immediate value, works just fine. And, you know, you may ask, what happens if I need more than 16 bits, okay? Well, what you do is, what you're doing is you're adding these 16 bits of the register over here, okay? You have some other instruction beforehand that puts a value in the register so that I end up needing less than 16 bits, okay? And the same is gonna happen when we have these branch instructions. You know, Spark added a register, so these modes are also very similar, MIPS modes are very similar to, like, RISC-V. You know, RISC-V has a very similar thing. Spark adds another register-to-box register mode. Now, there are two other issues that have to do with addresses, which I do not think you all have encountered before. The other stuff you likely have, okay? One is access alignment, and the other is Indian border. Who's seen these before? Because you had to move bytes from one machine to another machine. First thing you recorded. Yeah. Okay. So let me tell you what these are, access alignment, and I'm gonna take some time to do it over here. So here is my memory, and, you know, these are different bytes of memory. Okay? And so this is, you know, say address zero, address one, address two, address three, four, five, six, seven, okay? And, you know, I'm storing some, you know, data, and, you know, so this, you know, ends up, I have a byte of data, so I store it in the first byte, then I have another byte of data, I get, you know, data and byte, and then say I have data that is four bytes. Okay? So what I could do is I could store that data as the first byte here, second byte, third byte, fourth byte in the data. Okay? No worries. That's how I would normally do it. Okay. Now, I go and do a load for that data D. All right? And for the load, for that data D, I generate the address. It's going to generate this address of two, and this data is, you know, a word, so I need four bytes, so I need bytes two, three, four, and five. Okay? Life is good. No big deal. Okay? All right. How would a processor, you know, implement the reads of this? Okay. So, you know, when you send out an address to memory, memory is going to respond with data of a certain size. Say it responds back with four bytes. Okay? So now, if I had the data like here, I go out to memory saying, hey, I want addresses two and three. What it will give you is these four addresses. Okay? So I only get two bytes of that four byte data, and then I have to make a second memory access to get the remaining two bytes. Are you with me on this? Okay? So that is what is referred to sort of as an, you know, unaligned access where the data is not placed in memory, which is at a starting address that is module of the data size. All right? I have a question. Yeah. So I don't understand why we shifted somewhere along the development of the processor. We shifted from accessing eight bytes at a time to accessing a bunch of eight bytes, right? In the address generation hardware, you can still generate a, because it's just an adder, right? You can still generate an odd address, and if your memory replies in eight bytes, eight bits, so what's the problem? Where did this problem of alignment and the need to have it begin to arise? That's what I'm trying to sort of show you here, right? Okay? Look, the memory, okay, when I go onto the actual memory, okay, it is four bytes wide. Okay? So which four bytes at a time is gonna give me these four bytes, then these four bytes, if you will, all right? It's not going to give me only four bytes starting from here. That's gonna take me two memory accesses. Why is that? Because that is how I lay out how the memory is organized. Right? When I... A DRAM has rows and data, whatever, you give an address, and parts of the address are going to, you just can't go and read, you know? When you construct a memory of a certain size, an arbitrary set of bits from it. I don't know if I'm wrong, but you don't even send the little bits up to the memory address, right? No, you're actually getting the cache. Line, cache line. You're actually getting cache lines out over here, okay, to the memory. But assume that you're reading it at a byte, because you are actually, you know, the same thing then translates into a cache line where I'm talking over here at four bytes is you don't want data that is split across two cache lines, because you go to cache and read it at one cache line. If the word is split across two cache lines, you're going to have to make two accesses. More like quantized accesses instead of picking from wherever you want. That's the way hardware is built. Okay? Okay? So, instead, you know, what I could do is, when I actually lay out the data, okay, I could have the data aligned. So now, when I go and read this, you know, these four bytes, I will get all four of them. But now, software has to make sure the data is at this place. All right? And what that means is now if the, you know, this element of data structure comes after these, and these are two bytes, and this is four bytes, I have to have some wasted memory. Okay? Are you with me on this? Okay? So, address modular size of data must be zero for the access to be aligned. If I don't have an unaligned access, okay, what do I have to do is I have to, you know, I can support it in hardware. So the example was, if I'm splitting now unaligned access, the data being across two cache lines, I have to first check to see am I going to get everything in one cache line? Then if I can't, read one cache line, read the other cache line to get the data. It makes every access loop, too. Okay? So, you don't want to support it in software. And, you know, what you would like to do is you'd like to do is you'd like to make sure that most of the time, your data, you only have aligned accesses. Okay? But, you know, if you come and say, hey, no, I want to put data, there's D1 here and D2 here, I don't want to waste these two bytes of memory. Okay? What happens if you do that? The hardware has to support that. Okay? And so what you can potentially do is to say, hey, look, you can draw crap to a software and have it in software. You know, or you could use some, you know, other, you know, a crap to software and use these other instructions. And, you know, or what you could do is over here now, you could carry out these underlined accesses using actually two separate instructions. Here, I would do a load word left, maybe, you know, get those two, and then a load word right to, you know, get these other two bytes, for example. Okay? Just, you know, just having arbitrary on-aligned accesses and expecting support and hardware is going to slow everything down. Okay? Are you with me on this? Access alignment? I'm going to take two minutes just to do this other thing, too. Indian order, okay? And what is Indian order, okay? And so the Indianess is the arrangement of bytes in a word. Okay? So, okay. So, you know, here are the bytes of the word. You know, I mean, here, you know, here's a four-byte word. Okay? Are these the low-order bytes and the high-order bytes? Or are these the low-order bytes and the high-order bytes? Okay? So, am I writing in English or am I writing in Hebrew? Doesn't matter. Oda, read it out. Okay? Where it matters is if I am saying, hey, I'm used to saying, hey, no, characters, language written from left to right, and you are used to dealing with it from right to left. Okay? Then, if I want to send you something to take a look at, I have to give the byte order in the order that you are used to. Okay? So that is the Indian order. Okay? And, you know, this comes from, you know, Gulliver's Travels, which side of the egg you crack, it doesn't matter. Okay? But, you know, and so you can either use a big Indian order or a little Indian, which is a reverse order. Okay? Both make sense. It's just like, hey, you know, I'm writing with my left hand or right hand or whatever it is. It gets messy if I'm writing with my left hand from this side to this side. So, then you have to make sure when you're sending from one machine to another that it's working with a different engine. Okay. We'll stop here. We still have a few more, a little bit to finish up, but we'll do it there.
