Title: 752_Lec4
Source file: 752_Lec4.m4a
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, we can reduce this VDD, and C is reducing the number of transistors, what's the point of having more transistors if you want to just not use even fewer than you were using. The third option is F, if you reduce the clock frequencies, it's going to reduce this term linearly, static power, dynamic power linearly. It doesn't know anything about reducing the static power, but it also then reduces performance sort of linearly. The same circuit with the same CPI, same design with the same CPI, if you reduce the frequency linearly, then the performance is coming up. So typically, if you want to reduce F, you also try and reduce this VDD, so you actually get the multiplicative reduction of power. So what this leads to then is now a technique that is very widely used, which is called dynamic voltage frequency scaling. So when you need the performance, you run with a high voltage and a high frequency, and then when you don't need the performance, you reduce the voltage, go down to low power and you reduce the frequency. So this is just some example of processors where you can have the designs allow the frequency to be varied in a certain range and get it 50 MHz steps, and the voltage also to be varied, and you can operate in a high speed mode at such performance and so many watts or a low power mode at this performance and so many watts over here. This kind of, you know, DVFS as they call it, dynamic voltage scaling is also frequency, so it's DVFS, dynamic voltage frequency scaling is routinely used to try and control the power. So what else now you can use is you can, you know, reduce the power by having other modes. There's a, you know, common as a standby mode where what you're turning off the internal clock, so you know, the F goes to zero, the circuit, that circuit is not having the dynamic swings, okay. It cuts dynamic power linearly, but it doesn't affect static power, and you know, you see in machines, you know, every laptop has these standby modes, or you can actually have a sleep mode where you actually turn off power, where you also then stop the consumption of static power, okay. So you know, these kind of modes are, you know, frequently used, and you know, one of the things that we, when we talk about, when we talk about execution and speculation and branch prediction and something like that, you know, we'll see there's a fair amount of extra work done that you throw away, okay, and the first thing that comes to your mind is, oh, you know, okay, if I'm throwing away work and it took, you know, energy to carry out that work, I'm wasting energy you know, you know, having a worse power outcome, okay, but the whole point of all that speculation and so on is going to be able to go faster, reduce the time, increase the IPC, reduce the CPI, to get the program finished faster, okay, and so, you know, when for mobile devices, where you know, power and energy are a big deal, okay, there was a lot of, you know, debate about, hey, do I want to have this out-of-order execution and speculation when I'm throwing away, given that I have a very small energy budget, okay, in my battery, and the counter argument which prevailed was, okay, no, but you know, I'm getting out speculation, maybe throwing out stuff, but getting the program executed faster, so, you know, I can do what is called run to stop, run and get it done faster, and then go into low power mode and also put my other components in low power mode, okay, so the overall energy consumed is going to be less, okay, so another parameter that, you know, in certain environments we have to take into consideration is reliability, and you know, reliability is, you know, whether a device is, you know, good or bad, operating correctly or not, but, you know, you know, more interesting is what is called availability is, do I have some device to be, you know, can I, is there resource availability for me to actually carry out work, okay, now, you know, you know, this is a very common, you know, important metric in large data centers and the like, where, you know, for reliability, the metrics you use, there are two metrics, one is sort of the, an availability is mean time to failure MTTF, and then there's also mean time to repair MTTR, okay, so if I have an environment where I have only one device, if it fails, okay, you know, I'm out of luck in some sense, okay, but if I have two devices and one fails, the other one's still available, and if I can repair it and get back to having two, then I have those two available and I only don't have something available when both of them have failed, okay, so, you know, this redundancy, having a second device is critical for masking failures and allowing, allowing, you know, allowing to have the availability of functioning devices, so, you know, if I have a mean time to failure of one unit of three years and a mean time to repair of one day, if something goes bad and only takes me a day to fix it, okay, the mean time to failure of one of two units is going to be, you know, one of those two is going to fail one and a half years, okay, but if I can repair the one that failed in a day, then the mean time to failure of both is actually, you know, the mean time to failure of one divided by, you know, this mean time to repair divided by the mean time to failure, it ends up being quite large. The point being is if I have redundancy, okay, I can continue to have a fair amount of availability and, you know, what availability that I have depends upon how many to one, MTTR, MTTF, and the number of devices, etc, etc. This is again, you're just sort of giving your bird's eye view of one of the, you know, of some other metrics that get considered in design, especially of big systems. Okay, so, for, you know, how is technology scaling impacting reliability? Now, you know, see, as I have smaller and smaller devices, okay, the probability of failure increases, okay, and, you know, one is the device is defective, okay, and we are not, you know, that's a separate issue, okay, but, you know, redundancy is also going to be used to deal with some of that, and I can give you some examples as you go along, but more interestingly is transient failures, where something is temporarily incorrect and comes back working, okay, so the more devices I have, the higher the probability of getting a failure, okay. The closer the device is operating to a margin, the higher the probability of getting a failure, okay. So, DRAMs are filled with lots and lots of transistors, small transistors, and the capacitance that I'm using over there, you know, the charge at that capacitance is not very different from the charge of maybe, you know, particle strike in it, so DRAMs were first to try and basically, you know, it was known that if I had DRAMs in a space environment where there's a lot of, you know, alpha particles and so on, I need to have reliability, but, you know, these days, even in just ordinary, you know, down-to-earth environments, okay, you can have these particle strikes that can knock out a bit in a DRAM, okay. Also, because the power density increases the temperature, okay, so the temperature also, you know, you can make the devices less reliable. So, DRAMs, even when they are built, you know, they already have phenomena defects, and inside the chip they are built with redundancy, and when we talk a little bit about memory, I'll talk a little bit about, you know, the example redundancy you can use, okay, but, you know, other logic elements are getting to be less and less reliable these days. So, you know, in the last few years, one of the big things that people, you know, people operating big data centers have been talking about is they say, hey, we have these silent data errors that are happening where the hardware, you know, does something wrong, but it does it, you know, temporarily, and then the error goes away, but you have a silent data error, okay. No one understands when they occur, how they occur, and my response when I first heard that, you probably have a software bug that you don't know about, okay, but, you know, they say, no, we have these silent hardware data errors, we don't know, that's what they are, but they are manifesting as silent hardware data errors because we have just so many devices back in a, you know, relatively small environment, operating in, you know, quite extremes, if you will. Okay, so, you know, the key to providing a reliable release is to have redundancy, and the scaling that makes the device less reliable also gives us more devices, okay, and I can use those additional devices also to improve the reliability, and you probably all have seen error-correcting codes for DRAMs, and, you know, people are employing error-correcting codes even for caches and even, you know, record profiles and so on. Okay, so this is just to sort of summarize what we looked at in this chapter, is, you know, device scaling increases performance by reducing transistor and wire delay having faster transistors, and giving us more transistors with which to reduce the CPI. This part reduces the clock frequency, increases the clock frequency, sorry, reduces the clock cycle. It reduces local power consumption, but that is quickly undone by increased number of devices. It aggravates the power density and temperature problems. It aggravates the reliability problem, but gives us more transistors to solve it by redundancy. It reduces unit cost, but it increases startup cost, okay. Now, you know, I've been around for quite a while, and I've been hearing about the end of Moore's law for at least 20 years, okay, and it seems to keep going, and now people are convinced, now it's really going to end. We'll see. Okay, we'll probably go on for a few years, okay, because, because what comes after that, that's not clear, okay, but, you know, if it does go, you know, if it does, it is definitely slowing down. If it does stop, then we just have to come up with more clever ways to try and get performance improvement and energy reductions and so on. Questions? I know you said we don't really need to know, but why is the static power grow exponentially? Is it, like, leaks across the transistor? Is it sending more current through, or? No, no, no, no, no. We had an order paper a few, a couple of decades ago on the back-up static power, it's been alive. That's, yes, the characteristics of the device. I'm cool with that. Yeah. Adam Butzen, I had an order paper on this too, on actually the implications, we actually had orders to, you know, assess the impact and so on like that. So, okay, now let's go into the next unit where we talk a little bit about instruction set architecture. So what is an instruction set? The instruction set is the interface between the software and the hardware, okay. It's very well defined, okay. It's the contract between the software and the hardware. It's basically, you know, the software is saying, hey, hardware, do this, and the hardware is saying, I'm going to do that, okay. And if the hardware does what it's supposed to, the instruction set, correctly, okay, then the software is going to work correctly, okay. So this is the contract, and it's just a functional definition, and a very precise description of what to do, but no guarantees as to how to do it, okay. And so the instruction set does not tell you how the operation is implemented, which operations are fast and which are slow, okay, or which operations take more power and which operations take less power, okay. You know, you could have a instruction set that has an integer addition and has a floating point addition, okay, and there is no guarantee that the integer addition instruction will be faster than the floating point addition instruction. Probably it is, okay, but there is no guarantee, because the hardware could decide, oh, I'm going to implement the floating point instruction set this way, and oh, for integer addition, I'll take my own sweet time doing it bit by bit. It would be a nonsensical thing to do, but it could do it. There is no guarantee of it, okay. And instruction set, it's, you know, there's a language analogy analogous to languages of human communication. So the, you know, human language, you are communicating person to person, and ISA is communicating hardware to software, okay, or vice versa. And you need to be able to speak the same language to understand each other. You can drive it this way, that way, you know, you may get a little understanding, but not quite, okay, a full understanding. And so very similarly, the hardware and the software need to talk the same ISA. There are many aspects that are common amongst different languages. Different languages have verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, very similarly, different ISAs have operations for common calculation, operations of control, branch, operations for memory. And you have many different languages and ISAs, they have many similarities, many differences, okay, but, you know, they also have different structures. They both evolve over time, okay. You know, the Oxford Dictionary, the good old, you know, it's not online, but keeps getting new words added to it all the time. The key difference is that ISAs must be unambiguous, and of course, they're going to be explicitly engineered and extended languages, you know, whatever. They evolve in arbitrary ways. Okay, so this is our performance equation, instruction per program times cycles, but instruction times seconds per cycle. And we will see when instruction sets started out early on, and why they evolved that way, is that the instruction, each instruction in the ISA was complex. It had many operations, okay, and what this, you know, complex instruction did is it allowed for one, the program written in the instruction set to be quite close to a high-level language program, if you will, okay, and it was easier for people writing, you know, who was writing programs, it was humans writing maybe assembly language programs and so on like that. In a sense, it was easier for that. It was also good for code density, okay. And then as you had more devices, as you had more devices, then, you know, the intention was to, as you had more devices, you could have more space for instructions in your memory, okay. So the code density became less of a concern, all right, and the programs were being written not by humans in assembly language, but by created not by humans, but by compiler, okay. And the intention was, okay, you know, I'm going to, what I want to do is improve performance, so I want to try and improve these cycles for instruction, and the increase, you know, by having many smaller, simpler instructions that did less work, okay. But I increased the number of instructions. Hopefully, this increase wasn't enough to negate this improvement in the cycles for instruction, and hopefully this also reduced the, you know, clock cycle time, okay. So we'll, you know, what I just talked about, we'll see it in more detail in just a little while, each aspect of that, okay. So you're designing an instruction set, okay, and you know, I mean, like I said a couple of lectures ago, people think, hey, you know, there's an instruction set, and nobody else is going to ever design a new instruction set, because there's no need until someone, until there is a need, okay, all right. And in fact, you know, one of you had a homework one question, the last is ask you about the RISC-V ISA, which sort of came about very recently, you know, and, you know, why did it come about? Simply because a lot of people didn't want to pay the licensing fees to ARM to license their ISA, and a variety of other reasons to, okay. So what are the issues that go into the design of an ISA? What makes a good ISA? There's programmability, implementability, and compatibility. Programmability means how easy it is for whoever's writing the program in the instruction set, how easy is it for them to create the program, okay. Implementability is how easy is it to design a higher performance implementation. I shouldn't say how easy, nothing is easy, okay, but, you know, one ISA can make it harder to design a high performance implementation than another one. Not saying it's not possible, it's harder. It takes more resources, okay. People have also talked about, you know, instruction sets for low power, high reliability, and low cost, or other metrics that we talked about a little while, but really, you know, not much. You know, headway over here, there's been some research perhaps, but, you know, this is really is what implementability boils down to. How easy it is to build a piece of hardware that executes that instruction set, okay. And the third aspect is compatibility, okay. And what compatibility is is the ease to maintain the programmability and implementability over time as the languages, high level languages, and programs, and technology evolve, okay. Now, this is not something that is intellectually, I would say, you know, it's not very academic, or, you know, hey, you know, why is this even a consideration in what the instruction set looks like, okay. Well, real world, this is very, very important. And I'm going to spend a fair amount of time on this, okay. What this is, and how we deal with it, and what are the issues, and what are the consequences of that for a good night, all right. So we'll take a look at these one by one. Spend a fair amount of time on each one of these upcoming slides. Please ask questions, all right. Okay, so programmability, how easy is it to express a program efficiently? The question is, for whom? Okay. When earlier on, compilers were not very good, and most code was hand assembled. So what you wanted to do is you wanted to have, you wanted to be able to write your program with as few instructions as you would, okay. So each instruction was as similar to a high-level language construct as is possible. Okay, we'll see examples of that, okay. But then what happened is that, hey, you know, these programs are being created by a compiler, and, you know, the capabilities of the compilers evolve over time. They keep getting better too, okay. And what compilers want is they want something very different from others, okay. They, you know, a compiler wants basically some very regimented sort of things to do, and we'll talk a little bit about that, okay. And for that, you know, a compiler is going to want low-level fine-grained instructions, and we'll talk a little bit about this. So what makes an ISA, at least the thinking of some, is what makes an ISA easy for a human to program, and it is, you know, the thinking was, hey, you have to be very close to the high-level language. So you're writing in a high-level language, okay. And here's the hardware, okay. What you want to do is you want to say the hardware is doing instructions much closer to this high-level language, because between the high-level language and the hardware is what is called the semantic gap, okay. You are writing programs here, and the hardware wants programs over here, okay. So the thinking was that, hey, what you need to do is it's easy, you know, it's easy to write a program if you have an instruction that matches a construct in the high-level language. So what do you do in high-level languages, okay? You have loops. You have procedure calls. You know, you have, you know, access array elements. So, you know, you have, you move a string of characters from one region of memory to another region of memory, okay. You have a queue. You insert something into the queue. These are all things that, you know, you do in your high-level language contract over there, okay. So people say, hey, of course then what it means is I should have an instruction that does the same, okay. So then, you know, so, you know, I'm going to have an instruction that makes it procedure call just be one instruction, okay. So what happens when you go and, you know, make a procedure call, you save a return address where you're going to come back to. You go to the target address of the procedure. You save the registers you were using, okay. And then before you go, and then when you come back, you restore the right registers, okay, from there. We are going to do it in one instruction. So when you're writing a, you know, program, that's one instruction. The work that I just talked about of calling procedure doesn't go away. You didn't write instructions to do that work. Hardware has to do the work, okay. So the hardware has to implement all of that, okay. You know, x86, you know, has a single instruction where you give it a starting address, you know, of a source of the, where the string of characters is. Destination address, starting address, number of characters. It will read these memory locations, write those memory locations, and get into one instruction, okay, instead of writing a loop of simpler instructions, okay. And you are asking, why is that a bad idea? One is that, you know, the hardware is going to have to implement it. And once you have that instruction set in the ISA, it is there until it hurts you bad enough that you say, I've had enough of this, and I'm going to try and get, figure out a way to get, not do this anymore. Oh, just like it came up, okay. And so, and then, then there's the other issue. It's like, you know, I can have this, so, you know, Max had an instruction to insert something into a queue. And instruction is only good if it actually gets used, okay. If the creator of the program is not going to use that instruction, it's going to be a problem because you have to implement it, okay. You're going to implement an instruction that's never going to get used, or very rarely used. The problem is, it's very rarely used, but if someone uses it, they'll keep supporting it for quite a while. And you'll see what you have to do to get out of that, okay. So, you know, I mean, there were actually, you know, proposals where you could execute high-level languages directly in the hardware. And, you know, there was a company called Burrows that, you know, would sell a machine that, hey, you know, this is a machine that is going to run, I forget the name, Symbol or whatever it was, you know, some other, you know, one language. You write programs. Oh, by the way, you know, now, we also have the hardware do another language. We just have to change all the microcode and so on like that for that. But, you know, take your high-level language and run that directly in the hardware. Not very efficient, but, you know, I mean, that's the, you know, that was sort of, in a sense, you know, a starting point, all right. Okay. So, now, if you're going to have a compiler try and generate the code for a program in the construction set, then let us just take a look at what a compiler would have to do and the implications of that for the construction set. Okay. And a fair amount of what we're going to talk about is discussed in the paper by Wolf that you're going to do a review, do one Monday. So, what are the goals of the compiler? Very first thing that if you have a correct program, you're in the correct high-level language program, the compiler must compile it correctly in the ISA, so it runs correctly in the hardware. Okay. You would like most of your compiled programs to execute fast. You'd also like to be able to compile fast, you know. And, you know, in a couple of units, we're going to talk about statically scheduled wide instruction machines. Okay. And those are basically your, you know, building very simple, dumb hardware, if you will, except that it also then couldn't evolve to not being dumb, you know. But a lot of the work was done in the compiler. Okay. So, okay, fine. You would start your compile, go off to lunch, still compile. Come back, afternoon coffee, still compile. Go have dinner, maybe the compile compilation is finished by then, or maybe by next morning it's done. Doesn't work that well. Okay. You know. And, you know, people, if you're right, people write and say, hell, you know, I want my program compiled before I even hit the return. It should have compiled. You know. So, if it's going to take it, you know, that long, it's no good. You want it to compile fast. And, of course, do, you know, other things, game, et cetera, et cetera. So, the way what compilers are going to handle this beast is of taking the program and compiling it down to the ISA is there are multiple phases, there's a lexical analysis phase, figuring out what the different symbols mean, parsing it to figure out exactly what to do, okay, create an intermediate representation, then carry out a variety of optimization and code generation phases, okay, where, you know, you do multiple things and there are ordering issues over here, which, you know, like, you won't go until you take class like 536, you know, you learn more about that or 701. And then you generate the assembly code. Okay. Now, again, multiple phases with information being passed from one phase to the next, the phases being kept reasonably separate, okay, having an intermediate representation that goes from the phases and you eventually want to generate some assembly code. Okay. And, you know, Bill Wolf, who wrote that paper, who was exactly one of the people who actually was one of the first faculty members of the Carnegie Mellon CNU, you know, CS department and built that department and, you know, which is now one of the powerhouses, okay. And so what his argument is is look, an instruction set should not have solutions. So, you know, an instruction which says insert an element into a queue is a solution, all right, and if you can use it, if you can match what you're trying to do into this solution, maybe that works. Or mapping an arbitrary program with what you're doing, different things you're doing into solutions that have been provided is very hard. Okay. So what you want to do is to provide primitive operations from which you can build the solution. The compiler can construct the solution. So if I wanted to, you know, insert something into a queue, okay, then, you know, I'll have the head of the queue somewhere and memory out of register. So what I want to do is I want to provide a primitive into, you know, taking some data and writing it into a memory location that is pointed to by this register, the head of the queue. And then I want to provide another primitive to increment a value which would be implementing the queue. Okay. Updating. So what I want to do is, compilers, you know, I have a complex task to do. They are good at breaking the task into simpler ones because you're decomposing something into, you know, simpler components. They are less good at combining simple structures into complex ones. Okay. So it is, hey, you know, you know, I want to, you know, I'm doing A, B, and C, oh, and this is matching into this solution that I have. But if I do A, B, and D, can I use this solution, not use this solution? It's, you know, that kind of reasoning and pattern matching and searching, it's complex for the compiler to do. So it's much easier to synthesize complex instructions than to actually compare them to figure out which one to use. So what Wolf proposes that the instruction set, there are certain rules of thumb and principles that you should follow for the instruction set. So I'm going to, you know, talk about each one of these and try and, let's try and understand what each one of these is. Okay. So the first is regularity. So if I have some high level construct that I'm doing in the program here, okay, and I'm doing the same thing somewhere else, okay, I want to be able to basically do, if I'm doing something, I want to be doing it in a regular manner so I do it the same way every place that I do it. So then you just have to figure out, well, this is what I'm doing and this is how I'm going to do it. Okay. And so the next time around, if you are doing the same thing, you do it the same way, rather than the next time around you're going to do it something different. So, you know, if I am, you know, you know, carrying out an additional operation on, you know, if I'm carrying out an additional operation on two different operands in one place and storing the results somewhere else, okay, then the next time I want to, if I'm doing the same thing somewhere else, I'm going to do it in the same way rather than a different way. That's what I want to be able to do, regular, regularity. So basically, it's, it's, you know, what he refers to as the principle of least astonishment is like, okay, I shouldn't be astonished. Look, this is what I'm trying to do over here. I'm not, you know, it's, you know, if I'm doing the same thing the same way every time, I'm not astonished when I see something. The next principle or rule of thumb is, you know, what he calls orthogonal. So what has an instruction, okay, what you have is you have the opcode for an operation that you're doing and then you have the operand, okay, and then you have data type. What he's saying is that the specification of the operation should be orthogonal to how I specify the operand. If I had an add operation, you know, I should be able to specify the add operation in the instruction set and a subtract operation in the instruction set separate from how I specify the operands in the instruction set, okay, and if I do that, then, you know, if I have regularity and orthogonality, I should be able to compose an instruction by specifying the, figuring out what is the operation I'm carrying out and what are the operands that are being put separately. So let me give an example of something that is not orthogonal, okay. So if I want to have an, if I have an add operation and my operands are, say, in registers, okay, then I should be able to say, oh yeah, you know, I'm doing an add operation and I'm doing it on, you know, register X and register Y and putting the result in wherever the register is, Z over there, okay, so the operation and the operands are specified, so I can figure out, you know, put an operand in X and register Y and register Z, okay. What is something that is not orthogonal? It is, hey, if I have an add operation, the first operand has to be in register three, the second one in register four, and the second one in register five. If it's subtract, then first one has to be in R1, next one R2, and then an R3, okay. Where the operands are tied are not orthogonal to the operand. So now, if I did not have an orthogonal instruction set, I'm compiling it right this way, okay. Oh, I have an add operation. What if I have an add operation? I have to have this first operand here, and the second here, and this here, okay. I cannot specify them independently. It makes it much, much, much more difficult to create an instruction like that. Are you with me on this? Okay. So, then he further goes and says, says, look, you should have one or all, okay. So, for a particular instance, provide only one solution, or provide all possible solutions, okay. So, there's only one thing you can do, or, hey, you know, you do all these things separately, everything's going to be fine. It should not be the case that you say, hey, you know, you can only do one of these three things, okay, if I have an add. If I have subtract, it should not be one of these four things. It becomes much, much harder for the compiler to figure out what exactly to do. Okay. Are you with me on these principles here? So, that goes in the creation of the instruction set, and okay, I'm just going to move ahead a little bit, and, you know, just talk a little bit about MIPS instruction set, which has a lot of similarities to the ARM instruction set and RISC-V, you know, they have more in common than their differences, okay. So, what, you know, in this instruction set, you have three types of instructions, one for, you know, what is called an R type and an I type, J type. Let's talk about this. This is, you know, you have an opcode, which is specifying the, you know, some sort of bit specifying the opcode you're carrying out, and then these are the operands over here, okay. And so, what orthogonality says is, look, I'm specifying these bits of the opcode bits of the instruction separately from the operand bits, and these could be anything the operation will still work. Okay. Now, you know, any instructions that I have, you can build hardware to implement them, okay. It may not be efficient, but you can do that. What I want to do to be able to implement it efficiently is I want to be able to use a variety of techniques to improve the performance, okay. I want to be able to do pipelining, parallel execution, out of order execution, and so on like that, okay. Certain features in the instruction set can make it difficult to do these techniques. Not impossible, but much more difficult. So, for example, if I have a instruction set, you know, here was a MIPS instruction set, you know, and I said the opcodes are all going to be six bits over here. Turns out that, you know, you do actually have some more bits that specify what operation to carry out over here, but the main opcode bits are, if I had an instruction set which some opcodes were six bits, other opcodes were eight bits or whatever it is, some were four bits, then what it does is it complicates the decoding of the instruction. I first have to, you know, figure out, hey, is the opcode four bits or six bits or eight bits, and how do I do that? I have to take a look at those bits, okay, or, you know, what do I do in a pipeline? A typical pipeline, you know, you've seen a five-stage pipeline before, we'll see it again. In your first stage, you fetch an instruction, okay, and what do you have to do to fetch an instruction? You have to know where the instruction starts, what the program number value is, if you will, or if you want to use the x86 parlance, the instruction port value. In the next stage, you decode the instruction, okay? So, in the first stage, I'm fetching instruction one, okay, and in one cycle, in the next cycle, instruction one is being decoded, and I'm going to start fetching instruction two. How do I, you know, what do I have to do to fetch instruction two? I need to know the program number value of instruction two. What is the program number value of instruction two? It's the program number value of instruction one plus the length of the instruction, alright? What is the length of the instruction? I don't know until I've decoded it, unless the lengths are the same. Then I just say, hey, fetch 32 bytes and some instruction, I don't know what they are, throw it to decode, I'll fetch the next, I'll take my program counter and increment it by four, I'll get to the next instruction after, because it's going to be four bytes after this current one, okay? So, you know, variable instruction lets the formats complicate the decoding and make it more difficult to pipeline. And then you say, hey, why do we not have all the instructions the same size? You know, life is never simple. It would be good if it was simple, okay? There's always pros and cons, okay? And, you know, if I have all instructions the same size, all instructions the same size, we'll talk a little bit more about that. Another ISA feature is, you know, some instructions can have implicit state, okay? If I'm adding R1 to R2 and then putting the result in R3, R1, R2, R3 are explicit. I know what data updated. But, if as a side effect of that, I update some register somewhere or some bit somewhere, okay? That is, you know, that is implicit, okay? And you're saying, who cares? My program doesn't know anything about it. Everything is good. Why you? What are the problems in the hardware? Okay? So it turns out that when we see dynamic scheduling we will see that, that, let me, okay, let me step back a little. See I have an instruction over here that is adding R1, R2, R3 and putting the result in R3 and changing some bit, say like a zero register value, flag value. Then a later instruction, which is actually checking the value of this implicit state somehow, branch or something like that. Okay. Now, if I want to execute these instructions out of order, I can't do that. So in order to be able to determine whether I can do this instruction before this instruction, I need to understand, to check, to make sure that this instruction is not using any implicit state that this instruction has created. I know about the explicit state, R1, R2, R3. I don't know about the other thing. Okay. And when I want to dynamically schedule, I have to figure that out. It's going to make my dynamic scheduling complicated. Okay. Now, you know, another sort of implicit state, if you will, not relevant to the instruction set is, hey, you know, you know, my instruction is loading something from memory. Bring it into a register. That's all I know about when I write the program, right? You know, what the hardware does, it brings this from memory into something that the program has no idea about. It just makes the program run faster. Brings it into its cache. Okay. So the latency, next time I see it, is much faster. Okay. Good. I don't care. But it turns out, that implicit side effect now becomes a channel for a security attack. Okay. So, you know, I mean, a few years ago, there was this big Spectre meltdown stuff. They keep talking about it a little bit. They keep bothering the cloud vendors. Hey, your cloud is insecure and yada, yada, yada, whatever. You know, buy my new solution. But, you know, that's the you know, that now becomes perhaps, you know, something else to worry about. Okay. If I have instructions with variable lengths, it actually complicates the instruction scheduling. You'll see. If I have an instruction that is difficult to interrupt, that complicates many, many things. Let me give you an example here. I have one instruction you know, that's moving. I have a 100 character string to move from one memory area to another memory area done in one instruction. Life could be simpler. Why should I write a loop to do this and that and who knows what I'm doing? Say after I've moved 99 bytes, or maybe 90 bytes, there's a page fault. How do you handle a page fault? Stop doing what you're doing. Go to the operating system. Operating system takes relatively days. Okay. Millisecond compared to nanosecond. Do its thing. During that time you run something else on the processor. Including the code of the operating system that's handling that page fault. And then come back. Come back where? Start moving from the first byte or the 91st. How do I know I stopped at the 91st? Point. Life becomes interesting for a hardware designer. Software guy doesn't care. Figure it out. Hardware person makes my life much more complicated if I have difficult to interact instructions. These high-level constructs of instructions would also trouble the compiler as well. Yes, yes, yes. That is the point of wallpaper. If the compiler can see it's a 48 character instruction, a 48 character string, and my cache line perfectly fits there, so I could just use 48 and 48. But if you cannot see that, then it might have a lot of cache space. Exactly. Exactly. So complex instructions like that make it difficult for the compiler, but also that's different. Complex instructions are different from a difficult to interrupt instruction. This instruction, simple move instruction, not simple, a move instruction like that, is not necessarily difficult for the hardware to implement. It's only if it has to be if it throws an exception in the middle of the execution of the instruction is it difficult. So now what you could say software, make sure you don't do it do it in a way that you never throw an exception with software. No. I want to do what I'm doing. Okay. Okay. Alright. We'll come back to the length of the instruction and the variable length instructions again because, you know, they started out with instructions with having two or three lengths in IBM 360, then we went to any length instructions and then we went to fixed length, four byte instructions and Spark and ARM and then once it went into hey, no, I want to go into mobile phone world mobile phone, small amount of memory, small amount of memory I want to have my code size small and I want to have my code size small I have to have small instructions. So that's what then led to the creating of the ARM instructions, which are two bytes. 16 bits rather than the standard ARM instructions. We'll talk a little bit about that. The real world getting in the way. Alright. Now let me talk about compatibility, which is a critical part in the ARM way. What is, you know, compatibility? Very simple real world situation. Which is no one's going to buy new hardware if you're going to make and do new software. And, you know, the, you know, people just, hey, the code is written why are you bothering me with a long effort to get it right? And the person who wrote the code who knows where they are? It's like you know one of our faculty members is why she was the founder of a database company a few decades ago. And that company got bought out by Microsoft later on. And one of the Microsoft folks was saying, hey, you know, there's a comment and that piece of code which says don't touch this without getting approved by Jane. Jane long left the company three, thirty years ago. Okay. So you know, it's like, you know, software folks I don't want to be bothering I just want it to go faster. You don't have something to give me to make it go faster or go away. I'm not spending money. Which means and of course, what is the it's not the high level language program anymore. Who knows what the compiler was to compile it, you know, written by some individual assembly language, assemble. Okay. What you have is the executable code. Okay. So the new hardware must continue to run, you know, the code that was written. You know, IBM you know, was king for a long time. Had the 360, 370 architecture. 360 started out and then these are variations that add on to the basic instructions that they sold their money into banks. I was there, sold their machines into banks and banks are not going to change their codes. That's why IBM is still around, you know, because no one else is running their stuff. Or actually casinos. Casinos are the other big customer. Okay. And they aren't going to trust new software that's going to steal money from them or whatever. Okay. So the situation now you have is you have, you know, new instruction set programs that are being written into it. And two things. One is, as you have new hardware, you want to run the new instruction set. Or programs in your instruction set. But you also want to keep enhancing the instruction set. And the new hardware is going to now run the enhanced version of the instruction set. And the whole selling point is to, hey, if you use my new instruction set, you're going to run your program there. Old program, new program. I have a big data center. That's going to have some machines with old instruction set. Some machines with the newer version. It's never going to be the case where, hey, buy my new hardware and throw out all your old machines. Never going to happen. So now you must be able to run your old programs on the old machines, your old programs on the new machines, new programs on the new machines, and new programs on the old machines. Okay? So, what you want to be able to do is you want to be able to have backward compatibility where the new processors must support old programs. Very, very important. Okay? And you must have forward or upward compatibility where the old processors must support new programs. Okay? So, let's talk about this. New programs must support new processors must support old programs. Okay? My instruction set has this insert queue. You know, old guy did it. Retired. He hot shots down saying, I don't want to support this instruction set. It's too complex. It might can't do whatever. I don't want people just making the processor design more complicated. Let me just get rid of it. The processor doesn't have to support this instruction set. But there is some program that could have used that instruction set. And that program doesn't work on my new processor better. What I can do is I can I want to get rid of that instruction set. Okay? What I can do is I can say, look I'm going to make it run really slow. And eventually if I make it run really slow whoever may use my new hardware. Okay? And how do I make it run really slow? Don't implement it in hardware. Implement it in software. Okay? So, you know, what you can do is you can emulate that instruction and make it run really slow. But I don't have to waste my time and resource and mental energy on trying to get it fast and implement it. Okay. We'll talk more about this in detail on 12. Again, this is a very, very important issue. And that shows up in many situations. You start off with a clean slate. Everything is good. You don't need to worry about anything. But if you want to have longevity, if you want to survive for a much longer time, then the real world. Okay.
