Title: 752_Lec19
Source file: 752_Lec19.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Then you read the rows into the sense amps and the column decoder, and then you select the bit out of it here. Now what we'll briefly go through is several enhancements to this basic DRAM, and the main idea of all of those enhancements is to basically improve the bandwidth of providing bits. Latencies, there's a limit to what you can do about latencies, but you're trying to prove that, but still you can just do more and more in parallel to improve the bandwidth. So one of the first enhancements was an extended data out is where after you've read the entire row, then what you can do is repeatedly give column addresses, with each column address you toggle this column address row, and then for these second, third, fourth data items you're using, that you're reading, you're not repeatedly giving row addresses. Then came this synchronous DRAM. Synchronous DRAM now has a clock, and it's operating at the speed of a clock, and it has a wider data path, so you just need to give one row address and column address signals, after you give the row address you toggle the row address row, and then on each clock cycle, again you could be transferring different data elements from that row. You don't have to repeatedly provide column addresses. Then, after the basic synchronous DRAM came a variety of evolutionary enhancements, which basically try and improve the bandwidth somehow, and then they of course have some other typically electrical signal enhancements. So the ESD enhanced SDRAM overlapped the row buffer access with refresh, so you don't have to basically, you would continue carrying out the access of the DRAM while at the same time refreshing it. Then was the first major enhancement, which is the double data rate. The double data rate basically now, here you're transferring data one per clock cycle, and double data rate you were transferring on each engine of the clock. That was DDR, and then after that came a variety of other enhancements, DDR2, DDR3, DDR4, DDR5, and we have now sort of DDR6. So most of them were like the voltage, and some pre-fetching, and then further also, again lowering the voltage, getting twice the speed, increasing the data path, and internally to the DRAM have more banks, we have more parallelism when we talk a little bit about banking, and I think DDR3 had 32 bit wide channels, and then 4 I think added ECC on top of that, so it became 32 plus 8 bits of ECC, 40, and then the DDR5, they have 72 plus 8 bits of ECC, and then they have 2 channels, etc. Basically improving the bandwidth and then dealing with some electrical stuff over here. This flyby topology is basically a way of distributing the signals from one to the other, rather than all at the same time. This whole process of getting more enhancements, I started out by this company called RAMBUS that had the first high bandwidth DRAMs, they were trying to do them for gaming systems, but they had a proprietary interface, which basically nudged the rest of the industry to move along very sleepily to try and have these high bandwidth interfaces, and then they got those DDRs which are much more of a standard that everybody can design and use, design to use. Okay, I won't go into this either, but okay, so one of the things that happens with DRAM, just because there are so many transistors in there, there's so much of it, and you are operating so close to the margin, if you will, that you can easily have, you know, particle strikes that can, you know, strike a capacitance and flip the bit, all right, so DRAM bits can flip from 0 to 1 or 1 to 0, because there's a very small charge store per bit and the energy of the alpha particles strike it again, basically disrupt that store charge. So what you have to do is you have to have error correction built into those, and pretty much, you know, I mean, the big servers for decades have used error correction, okay, and you know, many years ago there was a company that called Tandem, which they, you know, built very highly, you know, the IBM server, you know, always had error correction in their memory. Tandem basically, you know, built systems that were, that could tolerate a lot of faults, and not only logic, memory, etc., and, you know, one time that system failed, and it failed because there was an earthquake in California that flipped over, and so, you know, lost power and everything, so it failed, but otherwise, you know, it would keep operating, all right. So what you have to do is in the key for DRAM reliability, you have to have some, you know, error correcting codes, you know, checks of some kind, and have more bits than you have data. I won't go into the different error correcting codes, and, you know, what that means is you actually end up having more memory than the data you might have stored, but you can make it more reliable, and, you know, you have these days, typically, codes that can correct single errors and detect double errors, single error correcting, double error detecting code. You can do a lot more than that if you're willing to spend more memory to do it. Okay, and so this error correction, typically, again, what you do is, you know, you have your normal data bits, storage, and then you have additional checks on bits, and you, the memory controller performs the error correction in checking to let you know, give you the correct sort of bits, and, you know, whether there's an error or not. Some of this error correcting is actually now even done inside the DRAM, just simply because the density is just too much over there. Just to actually correct defects rather than errors, because it's hard to get something with so many, so many bits manufactured free of defects. Okay, remember when we started talking, we just talked about process and reliability. You can get errors. Okay, so I just want to, you know, skim through that, talk a little bit about interleaving of memory. All right, so what you have is, you know, you have, you've built some module of memory, all right, you've built some module of memory, okay, and you've got whatever you can to have it be a certain latency and a certain bandwidth. Okay, now, if I want to improve the latency, well, I really can't improve the latency, but I can improve bandwidth, okay, so what I can do is, if I have four, you know, modules, if you would, okay, then I could read all four of them at the same time, okay, and then if I have a transfer path that is a certain number of bits wide, I can carry out the transfer to, you know, whatever it is, the CPU or wherever I need to send that information to by basically, you know, carrying out, you know, I read all of them, and then I then transfer based on how many of our bits wide this path is and how, you know, what the width over there is. Okay, so in a sense, what I can do is I can cut down just like we talked about, you know, cache fill and so on, critical word first, etc. We are reading the whole word, you know, it takes some number of cycles to transfer across the span. I can, in a sense, tolerate the latency a little bit by starting all those requests in parallel, and then transfer in the appropriate, you know, number of cycles based on the, you know, how wide the data is and how wide this bus is over here. Okay, now to do that, what I would typically need to do is I want to distribute the data across these different, and so these would be banks of memory, I want to distribute the data across the different banks of memory so that I can achieve some form of that parallel access. Okay, so I'm going to divide my memory into m banks and interleave the addresses so that an address is going to be in bank address mod m, and within each bank it's going to be at word address divided by m. Okay, so word zero would be in bank zero, one in bank one, two in bank two, should be bank n minus one, word n in bank n minus one, word n in bank zero, etc. Okay, so now if I'm reading, say, an entire cash line, then that cash line would be spread across those multiple banks, and then I can, you know, read all these simultaneously and then transfer those words of that cash line from these one after the other, as opposed to if the cash line was all in one bank, then I'd have to make, you know, if it was n words, I have to make n different accesses, each incurring the latency of access and then the latency of the actual transfer. Okay, so the interleave memory increases the memory bandwidth without necessarily increasing the path of this over here, because in a sense, what it does is, you know, rather than make a request, wait for latency and then transfer, I'm making those requests in parallel, and then basically keeping this bus fully occupied, in effect, achieving the overall bandwidth, which is limited by the bandwidth of this bus, as opposed to necessarily the bandwidth of each one of these banks over here. Are you with me on this? So, you know, here's another example of interleave memory where I have the DRAM chip CPU as a data bus with different memory controllers over here, perhaps. I can, you know, map cash blocks to separate memory controllers. I can have interleaving, you know, within each memory controller here across interleave across different memory controllers. And in fact, you know, this concept of interleaving, you're going to use banking even within a chip. So, when I talked about here, this chip, okay, you're actually having now interleaving within that memory chip to actually carry out that data transfer. Alright, any questions so far? Okay, so, you know, okay, step back a little bit. So, you know, we started talking about even right from day one is, you know, you have the semiconductor process. The logic process is different from the DRAM, the memory process. So, there are companies like, you know, Intel and DSMC and so on that do the logic process and build the processors. Okay, and then there are companies like Micron and SK Hylegs and I think Samsung's probably also building, you know, memory chips that you say that build chips on the memory process. Alright, so what ends up happening is the memory chips end up being more commodity that people aren't willing to pay too much for them and the processor chips, you know, basically they have the chips that do all the computation that people, you know, if it's 10% faster, you can charge, I don't know, 30, 40, 50% more, okay, a lot more. Okay, so the memory chip vendors are always looking for maybe, hey, can we do something that we can try and get a little more money? Okay, and so one of the concepts that has been around for a long time is the following, is the CPU which is running the program and somehow it's connected to the memory over here where the data resides and here is where the program executes. Okay, and you know, if you have applications where basically you're reading a lot of data from memory, doing something a little, small calculation, multiplication, addition, writing it back to memory, okay, and just repeatedly doing this, then perhaps what you can do is you can move some of the computation and actually carry out the computation in the DNAM chip over here. Okay, however, the DNAM chip that you can have over here, okay, because it is a memory process, not a logic process, you cannot build with something very fancy in computation. Okay, maybe you could do a simple, you know, add two bits or whatever it is, but you can do more complex stuff over there. Okay, so, you know, the question that comes is, you know, how do I, in a sense, take my program and, you know, carry it out over here? And people have tried a variety of techniques, okay, and, you know, it's, in a sense, it's hard to make your program up. We had some part of it scatted out over here, so some of the memory chip manufacturers actually had put a small little ARM CPU in addition on top of the memory controller, and then memory chips over there, okay, okay, however, something that keeps coming around again is the positive. So, you know, three, four decades ago, where, you know, you know, image processing, in a sense, you know, first came around, okay, what are you doing? You have an image of pixels and then you're repeatedly doing stuff on the pixels. Where are the pixels sitting around? They're sitting around in memory. Okay, what is the computation that you're doing? Well, maybe I'm adding, you know, two sets of pixels or whatever it is, etc, repeatedly doing the same computation in a very simple form of computation. Okay, and so maybe I can actually carry out that computation necessarily in the memory. Okay, so these ideas have been around for a while. They never quite materialized, but they also never sort of go away. Okay, and, you know, these days now, oh, hey, what am I doing in AI? Okay, I have these humongous matrices that are sitting over here. I'm bringing them up over here, either, you know, live streaming to a GPU over here, or maybe CPU for inference or whatever it is, and doing a little small, you know, numerical stuff on it and sending it back. Okay, so, you know, Samsung, I think, actually now, so, you know, the idea is, you know, rather than moving the data from VRAM to CPU, you know, computing to CPU, moving the data back, if I had some very regular, simple kind of computation actually carry out, here's my DRAM, I read stuff into those robuffers, have some simple ALUs to carry out that operation, and, in a sense, write it back. So one of our former faculty members, Namsung, you know, he is now at Illinois. He went and worked at Samsung where you could actually, and you can actually buy it as a product. I'm not sure how many people will buy it, but, you know, you can actually have a DRAM chip, which you just go into, the normal sockets and so on like that, that can actually carry out computation on it, too. Like this just came out a couple of years ago. So this is something that keeps coming up, and, you know, we'll talk about this regular computation again in this vector's unit, but this is one way of the, at least the DRAM manufacturer is trying to add a little value to the chip, but, you know, I think probably by now you've at least appreciated that, you know, all these hardware things that you do might as well be for not unless you have software that can use them, okay? And the thing that the out-of-order processors did is software, they're not bothering you to do anything, will just make software go faster, okay? For these kind of things, you know, software is needed, okay? You know, a lot of people are, you know, saying, hey, you know, we have all these excited critters that can do this much better than the NVIDIA GPUs can, and we can do this, whatever, you know? But software exists for, you know, CUDA and GPUs, and, you know, just having to create software from scratch is just a huge, huge, huge undertaking. You just don't have the time for it. Okay, so, you know, I mean, don't be surprised if you, like, see, I think a couple of, if you go back to the hardships conference a couple of years ago, they had the, you know, doing the processing in memory. All right, so, you know, again, this is a standard memory hierarchy, average access time, hit time, plus miss rate times, T miss, and, you know, this is our picture of our memory hierarchy we've seen before. Here are CPU first level caches, second level caches, maybe third level caches on a chip these days. Main memory, this, you know, first and second level cache is made of SRAM, this third level is made of DRAM. These are all going to be managed in hardware. This we will see is going to be managed in software, and how it's managed in software we will see it. And then there is this, you know, the next level is, you know, disk space, you know, disk either, you know, magnetic disks or, you know, flash disks or whatever it is, you know, some persistent storage of some kind. All right, so, the way we organized, you know, these caches and carried out data movement in these caches is we moved cache lines, cache blocks, and it's done all in hardware, and these are completely invisible. The software didn't know anything about it, for the most part, unless you have prefetch instructions, etc., etc., all right? Okay. For this level, we are going to basically have a, you know, page virtual memory, and we will see what that means, where basically this main memory is never, just like the caches weren't large enough to hold all your programs and data, the main memory is also not going to be large enough to hold all the programs and data that you want. So you're going to have to move from the disk to the main memory and vice versa, okay? So this main memory is going to be, effectively, act like a cache, okay? And it's going to act like a cache for the disk, which is large enough to have all your data and programs, all right? So the programs want a conceptual view of memory of unlimited size. The disk is going to be the backing store when our physical memory is exhausted, our main memory, and the memory acts like a cache, and it's going to be managed mostly by software. We'll see the main issues in doing that, and we will see how we can have hardware assist the software, okay? Now, when we talk about a cache, we talk about several parameters of the cache, block size, associativity, replacement policy, right through versus right back, right allocate versus no right allocate. You saw that, right? For our memory as a cache, the block size is going to be a page which is going to be much bigger than a cache line, okay? Four kilobytes is very common page size, and people have talked about having much larger page sizes and variety of number of page sizes. We'll briefly see some of the issues over there, probably not, but, you know, the block size is many tens, I mean, you know, many kilobytes rather than, you know, tens or hundreds, small 100 bytes, okay? The associativity is going to be fully associated. Why do we want fully associated? Because the whole purpose is going to be on increasing the hit rate and reducing the number of misses, right? You'll see that. The replacement policy, you know, we talked about in the caches, you know, LRU conceptually, but really LRU may be hard to implement, so we did that not MRU, for example, and, you know, for this virtual memory, and, you know, the replacement policy for those caches, the caches, they had only a few, you know, a few clock cycles to access data, figure out how to make decisions, etc., okay? For, in this case, we will have a lot of time to be able to make a decision, because a miss in a cache, when it went to the next level, if it went, a miss in an L1 cache went to L2, maybe it took 10 cycles, 20 cycles. If it went to L3, it took me 40, 80 cycles. If it went to memory, maybe 200 cycles. If you have a miss in memory, it goes to DES, it's going to be millions of cycles. So you have a lot of time to, you can run, you know, a software program that can take, you know, thousands of cycles and still be in the noise compared to millions of cycles, okay? There is no, you know, write-through is not practical, because write-through meant was you're writing into that level and the next level. Here, to write something, maybe take, you know, 200, 300 clock cycles, there's millions of clock cycles, you're just going to have a write-through, it's just not practical. So you're going to have write-back. And very similarly, you're going to have a write-allocate policy. We'll see this a little bit, okay? So we are going to lower miss at all costs and, you know, I don't need to reemphasize this again, you can just repeat what we've been saying. So just to compare parameters between your first level caches, second level caches, main memory, the time to hit over here is maybe, you know, one to two nanoseconds, you know, if I have a gigahertz clock, okay, here it is, you know, small number of nanoseconds, the miss cost is the latency here, the miss cost over here is going to be, you know, 100 nanoseconds maybe, which is the time taken to access memory. However, the time taken to access to deal with a miss is going to be, you know, maybe milliseconds, okay, you know, six orders of magnitude. These are typically the different capacities, the block sizes, and for our purpose, we're going to have fully associated over here, the replacement policy is going to be a little more, you can do a little more smart because you're implementing it in software and you can take, you know, many hundreds of, you know, cycles to actually implement that replacement policy. It's going to be, you know, not right through, right allocate, there's no right buffer, no victim buffer, and, you know, prefetching, there is prefetching ultimately be done in software, no hardware prefetching techniques. Okay, so, you know, let's take a step back and, you know, ask, you know, what is the concept of virtual memory and how it actually came about and how it evolved to, you know, become what it is in a sense. Now, so, the idea is to treat the main memory as a cache of something, okay, and the contents are going to be some dynamic subset of whatever the program is working with. You want this to be dynamic content to be transparent to the source. The original motivation for virtual memory, which came out, you know, in the early 60s, was you had, at that point, in 16k words of core memory, remember this was before electronic DRAMs, and you had, you know, 96k words of drum storage, and, you know, the idea was to manage this fast memory and this backup storage so you could move data from this storage over here as was needed. Okay, but what made it some more successful was that IBM said, look, you know, what we're going to do is they're going to sell you machines, depending on how much you want to pay for it, machines with different capabilities. You know, if you want a high performance machine, that's going to have more memory, you're going to have to pay, you know, three times more or four times more, and these machines cost, at that time, many hundreds of thousands of dollars, millions of dollars, okay, for real money, all right, that, you know, only maybe customers like banks could afford. But, you know, what you wanted is you wanted to just simply write one software suite, and the same program could run on different machines with different memory sizes. So the program, when you wrote the program, you thought you had two to the n bytes of memory, regardless of how much memory there actually was, and so in effect, you know, the memory that you have is virtual, it's not there, but it appears to be. Okay, it doesn't. So, you know, I think actually it was very interesting, I mean, the way they would sell you a high performance machine, how they would differentiate a high performance machine from a low performance machine is the same thing that would just come on and turn on a million dollars, turn this knob on, and thank you. Now you're faster. Okay, so, you know, let's say it's a good deal if you can have it, okay. So, okay, so the idea basically is, look, you know, and also, you know, what I want to do is, you know, you know, on top of this, I wanted to have time sharing and so on like that, multiple different processes, you know, you can run the same machine, multiple different programs in the same machine. So the idea is, again, you've seen it before, but we do it from a viewpoint for how we can hardware assist over here. So the program is going to be written assuming it has two to the n bytes of memory access, okay, and that the program is going to, an address that the program is going to generate is going to be a virtual address. And it's going to be the same address regardless of, you know, how much memory the machine you are running on has. And, you know, so you have a 32-bit machine or a 64-bit machine. If I have a 30-bit machine, I have two to the 32 bytes of memory I can access. 64, I have two to the 64 bytes of memory I can access. The memory in the actual machine physically is going to be accessed, this is, you know, your DRAM is going to be accessed using physical addresses. And it has two to the m bytes of physical memory over here. And so I'm going to access it today, two to the m bit physical address. And m is going to be much less than especially if I have 64, okay. So, you know, 32 is two to the 32, that's four gigabytes, okay. Two to the 64 is a lot of memory. You know, even, you know, a machine that has, you know, even a terabyte of memory, that's two to the 14, okay. That's a, you know, that's a long ways away from two to the 64, okay. Your program is generating a virtual address that's 64 bits. Your physical machine, even if it has a terabyte of memory, is only using 40-bit addresses, okay. So what you're going to do is you're going to map that virtual address to a physical address somehow. And what we will do is we will consider this virtual address to be a collection of pages, and the physical memory to be a collection of page frames. So we're going to map a virtual address to a physical address, okay, which the page is going to be the same. So it's going to be mapping a virtual page to a physical page. And this mapping is going to be done by the operating system that's going to manage this memory and the movement from this desk to this main memory. And in this movement that mapping need not preserve contiguity. And in fact, you know, a lot of tricks for not having contiguity so many times you can play games. And further, you know, a virtual page need not be mapped to any physical page. In fact, if you have, you know, if you have two to the 64 bytes of memory you can access, and only maybe two to the 36, say for example, that you can, you know, that are there in your physical memory, there are a lot of virtual addresses or virtual pages that are not going to be there, okay. And the pages that are not mapped, of course, are going to be living on the desk, they are going to be living on the desk. Okay. So virtual memory is actually very useful for several things. Because in a sense, what it's allowing you to do is it's going to be allowing you to deal with the functionality problem by simply adding a level of interaction. So the first thing that allows you to do is to implement multi-programming where you can run multiple programs on the same machine at essentially, you know, the same time as you will, okay, and isolate them so they aren't stepping, aren't accessing each other's memory. So each program or each process thinks it has two to the n bytes of the address space, each thinks it has a stack, and all those stacks start at the same address. Okay. And what you can do is you can take the addresses of these different processes, the virtual addresses, and map them onto completely different physical addresses. So then the CPU is going to be accessing the physical address, okay. The program and the CPU is going to be accessing the physical address. So, you know, your process program one is not going to be accessing data from program two because it is in a separate physical address. So what started out as initially, you know, motivation for virtual memory was compatibility. Okay. People quickly realize that, hey, you can actually use that same feature to also implement multi-programming and isolating those programs. Okay. And then further, you can also use the same feature to add some, you know, protection mechanism. Okay. So what do I mean by that? Okay. So what we will see is we will have a mechanism to translate a virtual address to a physical address, and that mechanism is going to be a software structure called a page table. Okay. What we will further do is along with that page table that translates mapping from virtual address to physical address, we will keep some additional information for that page. Okay. Some of the information that you could keep with that page is some capabilities that whatever is mapped from that page can have. Okay. So whether that page can be read or written or actually whether the bits in that page could be, you know, instructions that you could execute. Okay. And multi-user, and we will see a little bit of that later on. Okay. So one user won't be able to access another user's memory. It's only the operating system can see and access all the memory. And if a user tries to, you know, if this, you know, if the green program tries to access this yellow memory, which is the memory of the yellow program over here, then you can say, look, hey, it's trying to access, say, you know, read data that it doesn't have permission to, then you can create an exception and the OS can decide what to do. Okay. Maybe terminate the program. Another useful thing for virtual memory is to allow two processes to communicate. Okay. So if I want to have, you know, two different processes, the green process and the yellow process, communicate with each other. Okay. So say I want the green, you know, process to pass data to the yellow process. Okay. The way I can do that is the green process could be writing into an area of memory, its memory. Okay. Let's say area X. Okay. The yellow process would be reading from its area of memory, say area Y. Okay. And then the operating system could map X from the green process and Y from the yellow process to the same physical address, Z for example. Okay. So the green process where it wants to pass something to the yellow one, it will think it's writing into X, but it ends up being written into Z. And the yellow one will think it's reading from Y, but it ends up being reading from Z. Okay. So you can map virtual pages in different processes to the same physical page and allow inter-process of communication. Okay. So, you know, basically what you're doing is you are creating a level of interaction between the address that the program thinks it's working with and the address that it actually ends up using. Okay. And you can, you know, solve several issues, problems that you have by adding levels of interaction. Any questions so far? So the program is going to be generating a virtual address. Say it's a 30-bit virtual address. And say I have 64-byte pages. The address is going to be treated as it consists of two parts. The first part is a byte within a page. And if it's a 64-byte page and these are byte addresses, then I have 16 bits that determine the byte within the page. Okay. And then the remaining 16 bits are going to be a virtual page number. Okay. BPM. Somehow now I'm going to translate this virtual address to this physical address. And the way I do the translation is I do not change the page, the byte within the page bits from the virtual address to the physical address. Leave those the same. But then map this virtual page number to a physical page frame number, a physical page number. Okay. So say I have a 2 to the 26-byte memory. What is that? 64 megabytes. Okay. And, you know, so I would have a 26-bit address. The 16 bits of the address would be the page offset from the page. Oh, this should be 25 over here. Okay. And the 10 bits would be the page frame number. The page offset is not translated. Okay. So in this case, I have 64-byte pages, 16-bit page offset, 16-bit VPN. Okay. You know what I mean. Okay. So here you make this 27. That's fine. Just change this to 27. Okay. 28-bit physical address, which has a 12-bit page number. All right. How is this translation carried out? The way this translation is carried out is via software, but we'll accelerate it hardware. So the operating system has a data structure that is called a page table. This page table, as I have it right now, is going to be simply a linear array. Okay. And the number of entries in this linear array is going to be how many virtual pages I have. Okay. And each entry in this page table is going to be the physical address plus some other information. Okay. Information like bits to say whether you can read or write or execute that page, for example. So let us see how big this page table is going to be. All right. So very simply, I would access this page table with the virtual page number and get the physical page number for that and whatever the reference, you know, the protection bits would be. So say I had a 32-bit machine and I had four kilobyte pages, and each page table entry was four bytes. Okay. So, you know, each page table entry over here was four bytes, and I had as many entries as virtual pages. So if I have a 32-bit machine, I have a 32-bit virtual address and access four gigabytes of virtual memory. If each page is four kilobytes, then the total amount of memory I can access divided by the page size is the number of virtual pages. Okay. So I have 1 million virtual pages over here. Okay. Two to the 20 virtual pages. If I have, so I have 1 million entries in this page table over here. All right. So if I have 1 million page table entries and each entry is four bytes, I take in four megabytes for this page table over here. Four megabytes. Okay. That doesn't seem that big, you know, bigger deal these days especially. Okay. I have a fair amount of memory. But these days I also don't have 32-bit machines. Okay. How big would this page table be first if I had bigger pages? If I, instead of having four kilobyte pages, I had 64 kilobyte pages. Then with a 30-bit machine, the number of virtual pages would be one meg by 64 kilobytes. Sorry, you know, four gigabytes divided by 64 kilobytes. And that ends up being, what does it end up being? 64 kilobytes. Okay. And then if each takes four bytes, then my page table is going to take only 256 kilobytes. What if I had a 64-bit machine? If I have a 64-bit machine with four kilobyte pages, the, you know, so four kilobytes is two to the 12. So basically I have 64 minus 12, 52 bits in the virtual page number. So I have two to the 52 virtual pages, two to the 52 entries in this page table over here. Okay. That is a lot. Each entry being four bytes. That's not going to quite work. Each entry has to be bigger than four bytes, not two. That, it has to be bigger than, not necessarily if I don't have too much more memory. Well, then you better have four gigs. No, no, no, no, no. The, depends, just depends on how much physical memory I have, right? You know, if I have a gigabyte of physical memory. There you go. Okay. But the number of bits this way is not that much. It's this. Are you with me on this? See the problem? Okay. So, you know, what we're going to do is basically come up with different structures. And the different structures are going to be made, you know, on the realization is even though I have two to the 64 bytes I can access in a program, I'm not going to be accessing all those addresses. Before we do that, let us see, before we exploited our observation, let us see what is it we can do. So what we can do is we can have multi-level page tables where we can have a tree of page tables. The lowest level of the page tables hold these page table entries. These are these entries of the page table over here. Okay. And then the upper level page tables hold pointers to the lower level page tables. And different parts of the virtual page number are going to be used to access index into different levels. Let's see what I mean by that. Okay. So I am going to have here, this is a two-level tree where in the second level are going to be all my page table entries. Okay. And in the first level are going to be pointers to some set, you know, of these second level page table entries over here. All right. So let me say I had a 20-bit virtual page number. Say I am accessing, taking 10 bits to access an entry. Okay. The upper 10 bits is going to be used to access the page table root. So I will select one of these pointers to one of these second level page tables. And then the lower 10 bits are going to be used to select an entry in that selected second level page table. Okay. Again. So the yellow bits select one of the second level page tables. And the green bits select an entry in that selected second level page table. All right. Are you going to hear this? So let us figure out now. What we figure out over here is this page table here, very simple page table that we had, took four megabytes. All right. And the idea is to save space. Okay. It is too big. So let us figure out how many bytes this two level page table is taking. And I am trying to save space. All right. So first let me compute the number of, so each one of these page tables in some sense, second level page tables is also going to be stored in its own page. That is also going to be a page element. How many pages are needed for these lowest level PTEs? Each I have four kilobyte pages and I have four byte PTEs. Okay. So I can have one K PTEs per second level page over here. I can have one K PTEs in each one of these four K pages over here. If I need to have one million PTEs, I need one million PTEs because I have four kilobyte virtual memory and four K page size, I have one million PTEs. Okay. So if I have one million PTEs and I can store one K PTEs per page in the second level page tables, I have one K of these, one K of these second level page tables. All right. If I have one K of these second level page tables, I need one K pointers in the first level page table. Okay. And if each pointer is 32 bits, I have one K pointers, each is four bytes. That is going to take four kilobytes. So I need one upper level page table. So I need one upper level page table, four kilobytes. It's going to have one K pointers and each of those pointers is going to select one of these one K pages over here. Each one of those is going to have a one K page table entry. Okay. How much space does that take? Okay. How much space does that take? I have one K pages over here, each is four kilobytes. That's four megabytes plus four, one page over here, that's four kilobytes. So it's four megabytes plus four kilobytes. Here I was only taking four megabytes. So I'm actually taking more space, a little more space. Okay. So what gives? Okay. Well, what gives is the following. Very large virtual address regions are unused. You know, I'm not using all my two to the 64 bytes. If I do not use that memory, I'm never going to address it. Those second level page tables need not exist. Okay. And the corresponding first level page tables are effectively not. So say now I have a program that has two megabytes of code and it has 16 megabytes of data working on an EAP and of course it's also using a stack and say stacks are small typically. So say it's using 64 kilobytes of stack. Okay. So of all this virtual address space, you know, of all the different two to the 32 VPNs it's going to be using, you know, add it to 32 bytes of address should be accessing. It's accessing two megabytes of code, 64 kilobytes of stack and 16 megabytes of EAP. All right. Each one of these second level page tables, it has one key entries and one key entries and each entry is mapping four K bytes. So one K times four K. So each one of these second level page tables is mapping four megabytes of memory. Okay. So if I have two megabytes of code, that I can map with only one second level page table. If I have 64 kilobytes of stack, again I need to have only one of these second level page tables. 16 megabytes of EAP if it's all contiguous. Okay. I only need to have four of these second level page tables for the EAP plus one for this first level page table. That's going to have only one, two, plus four, only six of the one K entries are going to be non-null. Okay. That ends up being a total of seven pages, which is 64 kilobytes only, much less than four kilobytes. Okay. Any questions about this? So these days, I think the base tables have three, four, five levels, five levels. Five levels simply because I have to do some virtual number, like a virtual machine thingy first or whatever it is, or no, just even for a normal- Like 56 bits of physical address they will support. Until very recently they were four level page tables, but now they're five. Five levels. You know, I got lost when there were two because I figured I don't care whether it's two, three, four, five. We care what we're going to do about it in hardware. Okay. So we'll figure out what to do about that. More levels in hardware means more pointers to change at a slower time before you can get to the actual translation depth. Yeah. Well, once you get to it, you can do smarter things. So you don't make sure you don't get to it. You don't have to do all that stuff. Okay. So they have actually been alternatives proposed in addition to these multi-level page tables. You know, one alternative that actually some machines did have is what was called an inverted page table. So, you know, the normal page table is an effective linear array. Okay. This inverted page table is a hash table. Okay. And, you know, hash table needs to be only of the size that is proportional to the size of the physical memory, not to the virtual memory. And you can actually take the virtual page number and the process ID, carry out the hash, figure out the table offset, and get to that index. And then, you know, you can have to change down and get the conflicts, et cetera. And, you know, this has been implemented a couple of times, but it's not that much these days because, you know, it's six of one and a half dozen on the other. You know, you're going to have to end up having a, you know, a lot of the something on top of this to manage all the other stuff anyway. Okay. All right. So, we are going to carry out a translation between a virtual address and a physical address. Now, let us see what are the other questions we have to ask. What is it we're going to try and do? We're going to translate between a virtual address and a physical address. Why do we want to do that? Because we want to maintain compatibility. We want to allow multi-programming. We want to allow protection, et cetera. How are we going to do it? We're going to have a page table that implements that. Then we start asking the other questions. Okay. Who's going to perform this translation? When are you going to carry out that translation? And where does this page table reside? And how you access it and what you do with it? Okay. The conceptual view is every time you generate a memory address before you access the memory hierarchy, okay, the memory hierarchy, CPU is generating a virtual address. It thinks it's accessing some address who knows where it is. Okay. That address somehow got from here to here, and then somehow got from here to here, and the CPU is hopefully going to get the data for that address from here. So the CPU is going to access this cache with a physical address. You see a little bit, you play games a little bit later on, okay? But the CPU is going to access data and memory, so it's going to be a physical address. So now to generate, to ask the gender to carry out the translation from virtual to physical address for every reference that the CPU is making, you have to go and access this page table. Okay? Where is this page table? It's also in memory. And so, again, Mike was good. Where you went to the page table in memory, you got it, and things are fine. Now, you have to go to a first level page table to get a pointer to a second level page table to get the page table entry. Okay? But now, you have to go from the first level page table to a second level page table, which is also in memory, another memory access, to a third level page table, which is also in memory, to a fourth level page table, another memory access, and now it's even to a fifth level page table. Okay? So for each memory access the processor is trying to make, there are five additional memory accesses. Some of them, I mean, many of them are not going to be there in the cache. Okay? So that itself is sort of not going to quite work out. Right? So, but, conceptually, you have to walk through the levels of the page table for every load, store, and every instruction. What we are instead going to do there is you're going to cache these translations. When we eventually get down to the last level page table and find the page table entry, physical page, and page table entry for that virtual page, you're going to cache it. Okay? You're going to cache these translations in a transmission cache to avoid repeated programs. Okay? Conceptually, you're also disarming the program from modifying its own page table entries, by the way. That's why you're going to need, that's why you make, you know, these pages of the page table will also then have special permissions. This transmission cache that we have is what's going to call a translation look-aside buffer, or a TLB. In many other cases, it's also being called, you know, just a translation buffer or, you know, there are a few, you know, people have given this different names over here. Okay? So it's basically, you know, when we have a performance problem, we add a cache, address translation is too slow, we're going to cache the translation. After you've got through those five levels of page table, got the entry, you're going to cache it in a small cache. And this cache, you will see, is now you're going to have to access for every memory reference that the processor makes. CPU is generating a virtual address. For every virtual address, you're going to access this TLB before you can generate a physical address that you can access the cache. Because it is accessed all the time, because you need it before you can even access the cache, this has to be very, very fast. For it to be very, very fast, it has to be small. Okay? But also, you want to be able to have a very high hit rate in this TLB. So you typically try and keep it highly associated. All right? And, you know, what the this TLB is exploiting temporal locality within the page. So I go and carry a translation for a full kilobyte page. Okay? You know, just like I stayed within the same 64 byte cache block, I'm staying much more often. I make more repeated references to a four kilobyte page. Okay? So I am hoping that all those repeated references to the same four kilobyte page, which are accessing the same page table entry, even though they all maintain five different levels of accesses to go through. Okay? They all end up basically, you know, it's the same page table entry that I can go and get from this TLB. Okay? If an entry is not found in this TLB, then I invoke a TLB mishandler. What does this TLB mishandler do? This TSP mishandler, TLB mishandler will go to this root page table with that virtual address, figure out the next level, figure out the next level, next level, et cetera. Basically carry out those repeated linked memory references, you know, portaging memory references, check to that page table entry and bring it into the TLB. So far so good? Yeah. So if we know that we have like five levels of interaction, basically, would we not have like five, five or six registers that the OS writes to whenever it performs a new, you know, context with where it already stores where, okay, this is the root page table, this is the base second level where, you know, it was the most recent access, so the TLB mishandler can kind of accelerate this and not have to walk every other entry. Well, the root page table is stored, the root page table address is stored, okay, and typically also the root page table would also be locked into the cache. So we have this multi-level base table, and this works because we are accessing certain parts of the space table startup on this, from there the access parts move on to the memory, from where the heavy access part will move on to the on chip L2, from where some of those accesses will move on to the memory, for example, each one of
