Title: 752_Lec14
Source file: 752_Lec14.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

You don't talk to me, you don't have anyone on the phone. I, you know, it would be best if you would get, you know, uh, scheduled, sent me mail saying you're coming to the office hours is fine, but, you know, um, um, um, sometimes people ask, you know, I can go and I'll say that. And if we scheduled like 15 minutes, half hour? Oh, uh, 15 minutes should be more than an hour. Okay. What I think it's just going to be is because, you know, you know, people talk about, hey, you know, they're going to like, you know, do some project with some software they're going to download somewhere and, you know, the first question I'll ask is are you aware how long it might take you to get some third party software actually up and running? Okay. And, you know, that kind of stuff, okay. I need to, you know, make sure people have an understanding, make them aware of the things that they are likely to be dealing with. And a lot of that is going to be, you know, can you get this project done in the time frame of, you know, five or six weeks that you have? That is the biggest issue. You know, there are people who have to make a lot of money. You know, I think, you know, it's like that's true. As I say, you think you can do things a lot, and that's true. But some of these things take more time. Okay. My boss used to give me a factor of four. If I said something would take a week, she knew it would be about four weeks and it would really do it. And you weren't even a grad student. One of the early 20s who thinks that, yeah, yeah. Estimating is hard. Okay. All right. So, all right, let's get back to where we got off last time. And, you know, I don't want to go through, well, let's just quickly run through, okay. Basically, you know, what we did, I'm not going to go through the reservation stuff, and you allocated a new physical register from the free list and read the old physical register that was mapped in the map table and brought it to the RAB. Next cycle, you know, the same for the next destination register and so on. So basically, you were taking stuff off the free list physical registers and updating the map table with the new physical register and then also updating the map table with the instruction completed. Okay. And then when the instruction retired, you freed that old physical register because you saw that's what we would need to maintain precise interrupts. If you didn't need to maintain precise interrupts, you could have freed that physical register well before. Okay. And, you know, basically updating the map table and pulling up an entry from the previous physical register. Okay. Now, the issue with the R10K compared to, so, you know, what gives, okay, what gives? Something else gives. And what gives is that the physical registers are written out of order, okay. And, you know, since there is no architectural register file, that's not necessarily a problem. However, how do you actually recover a precise state of the machine? Okay. So say I wanted to have a precise state at this cycle. What I really want is to give the appearance that all the instructions before it had completed and written their results into the registers and memory or whatever it is. And none of the instructions after that have even started. Okay. And basically what we need to do is the state that we are constantly updating speculatively, which is the free list and the map table. Okay. We are going to have to restore the map table and the free list to what they were, you know, what is needed for a precise exception. And we are going to be able to do this by manipulating the free list and the map table and not bothering the register file. So let us see. There are two options. The first option is a serial rollback using these, the key and the physical register, those fields in the reorder buffer. Okay. And we will go through that when we come back to the slide. Okay. So here was now the state at cycle five. And say you wanted to have a precise exception. Say this multiply caused some exception. I don't care what it is. You just say it caused it. And now you wanted to recover the precise state. Okay. So what you are going to have to do now is you are going to have to give the appearance that none of these actually even started. So you are going to have to undo them one at a time. And the way you are going to undo them is from the tail of the reorder buffer backwards until you get to the head of the reorder buffer. Okay. So what we will do is we will first undo this load, which is in reorder buffer entry number five. And the way we will undo this load is this physical register eight that we got for the destination, return it to the free list. This T old map table entry. We will go now and update the map table for F1 with PR5, which is what it was before I updated to PR8. Okay. And free this reorder buffer entry. While this is happening, the other instructions that are between the head and the tail still could be processing. You aren't basically, and the machines have stuff happening all over the place. You aren't just zeroing everything out like we were in the P6. Stuff is just going on too. Then we undo the add. And so we undo the add by returning P7 to the free list and going back and updating the map table for R1 to be PR4. Okay. And of course, free the reservation station entry and then free the reorder buffer entry number four. Next cycle, we undo the store. We free the reservation station. We free reorder buffer entry number four. Number three, there are no physical, I didn't take anything off the free list and I didn't bother the map table. So those structures need not be, nothing is going to happen to those structures. Okay. However, you know, what about the store writing into the data cache? If the store wrote into the data cache, then I have to undo that store somehow. Okay. And in a multiprocessor, that store could have gone from the data cache to some other cache maintaining coherence, et cetera. Okay. And you cannot, in a sense, once you let something out to memory, recall it back. Okay. So you don't do the store until you know that the store is actually going to retire. And, you know, there was a question last time when we had the, you know, reorder buffer entry number with the store and the reservation station. We'll talk a little bit more now, later today, about how loads in stores actually happen. Okay. So we don't ever write into the data cache, so you don't have to undo that. Basically, what you can see now is every time I want to have a store, the map table and free list, I can either roll it back serially. Okay. Alternatively, what I can do is that for any instruction that I want to have precise state for. Okay. Whenever that instruction is dispatched, I make a copy, a checkpoint, a copy of the entire free list and a copy of the entire map table. Are you with me on this? So you can restore that. So now you can actually do the design where you have all the copies of the free list and you have multiple copies of them. Okay. And you can copy, restore the copies back fairly easily or just like that. You can even have them in sort of a queue-like manner, like a reorder buffer, and you restore them from the checkpoint. This is fast, but this ends up being quite expensive. So you cannot do this for every instruction. So you try and do this for situations where are common. So when you have a low-concept branch which you may have to come back to because the branch was misprinted correctly, you use checkpoints and otherwise for arbitrary instructions, then you can have a severe rollback. Okay. The point being is that the recovering the precise state is much, much more involved in these kind of, on NK kind of architectures. Any questions about how you restore the precise state? Over here? This multi-cycle rollback finishes, right? Okay. What do you mean by recovery? Let's say we got an exception or an interrupt, right? And we have designed such that when an external interrupt comes, we need to jump to this handler. Okay. All right. So the reason why I ask that is when you use a term recovery code, that typically goes to the recovery code for the static state. This is not recovery code, which I executed. This is an exception handler that is being executed. To execute, say this is the instruction that caused the exception, you have to restore the precise state here before you start the exception handler for that. But actually, maybe you're going to, you know, if you have a TLB miss, for example, and you have it in the hardware exception, hardware TLB page water, then... It will just stall that while it will allow it. Yeah, so that won't be considered as something that you need to recover from. People write super fast software, right? Like all these financial people who write very fast software in C++ or something like that where microseconds matter. There's this kind of, you know, this multi-cycle on-end rule. Oh. So people who write that kind of stuff, they actually buy dedicated machines. They build machines on FPGAs because every, you know, tens of milliseconds matter in making money. Okay. No, you won't be using this kind of stuff to do training, or you do it in a way that's not doing any exceptions, yeah. What about, like, when a context switch happens? What do we, like, these physical registers, like, do we get them all so that we have this final state in them and then start pushing them to the stack and, like, they don't have to keep their actual physical registers when we come back from the context switch to the new process? Like, it seems a little complicated. What was your question? My question was, is this necessarily a serial event, or would you do it in parallel, but would it be so painfully expensive if you do it in serial, a serial rollback? Could you do this in parallel? I suppose. I mean, in a sense, you are doing this in parallel, because if you're doing four wide, you're undoing four at a time. Yeah. Okay. But these have dependencies on each other. All right, these have dependencies on each other. It's a little more involved. Okay, getting back to your question. What happens if you have a context switch? Don't have it. Don't do it? No. No. No. At the context switch point, you basically now have to give a clear state of the machine. Okay? And that is a... At that point, you know, you will be saving your registers to the...wherever you're saving them to, and then give a clean state of the machine. So the... That doesn't have anything to do with rollback or anything like that. I get that, right? But you still got to reassign physical registers when you come back, and... So when you basically... When you are going to context switch, you basically have to coerce your machine so you are out. Your thread is out of there, if you will. That means that any state map table and all the free lists and anything that it was using is effectively cleared. Okay? Which means that all the, you know, the registers will have to be stored out to memory wherever they have been stored out. Definitely free list and anything. When you come back again, you will come back with, you know, map table entry all clear, free list full of physical registers, and then you start calculating them as you are doing right with those registers. So you're just like... As you're doing, bringing in loads of values into those registers. Okay? No, you can't not do context switching. Yeah. No, you used to be able to not do context switch. You do not do context switches. Life was good. Okay. All right. Other questions? Okay. So, you know, just to sort of do a little side-by-side with the P6 and the R10k, you know, the P6 style has more value passing around, more bypassing, but the precise state is very simple, very clear. In the R10k, there's less, you know, value riding around, but it's a more complex checkpoint recovery situation. And this was a lot of faster clock. So when people wanted to get a faster clock, they were chasing down this path. You know, and in reality now, you're, in a sense, using a little combination support. If you just take the top at this point before I go to memory, load this course, because that is quite involved and quite interesting. So we saw this last time, instruction caches and so on like that, multiple branch predictors, a decode per cycle, and then the decode rename and retire. So they have, you know, they have separate pools for the integer, and then they have this vector. So they have the integer execution unit where they execute a lot of the integer operations, load store, and they have, sorry, instruction execution, which has the, you know, a lot of your normal operations, your load store, and then these vector units. We'll see a little bit of the vector instruction types when we get to unit seven. Okay? Huge reorder buffer over there. And then, you know, so then the integer execution pipeline, six ALU operations per cycle, two branches to multiply, vector we'll see a little bit more in order retirement with eight operations per cycle. They actually would break one instruction into more than one micro operation, if you will. Okay? And then, you know, a big general purpose register file here now. The reservation stations are divvied up. Okay, so one, two, three, four, six sets of 20 entering each reservation stations. Okay, so there is no either or. You know, we talked about, you know, techniques here and there. And in general, you're, you know, using mixes of everything. And are those one-to-one with the execution units down below? I don't know the answer to that. They don't get that level of detail. Very likely they are. So that can kind of screw your scheduling if you put the instruction into the wrong execution, you know, one that's going to take longer. So, you know, there is a whole body of research that deals with steering an instruction to where. And typically what you try and do is, you know, you figure out the dependencies and you steer it to the same slice where the instruction producing the values. You also cut down on the forwarding. There was a question I was going to ask you about the R10K. Is that when you get these instructions in the reorder buffer, it doesn't just grab them in order or does it to the next free unit? Because you could imagine that there's certain dependencies among those instructions. Like if you grab the third one down, we can finish some other ones faster or sooner. The reorder buffer is always going to have them in order. It has them in order because they have to be they have to be retired in order. So you don't have to send them to the functional unit in order. No, but they don't go from the reorder buffer to the functional units. We'll get there. Once I pop the other slides, we'll get there. Okay. And, okay. So now today we'll actually talk a little bit about this load queue and store queue. Okay. And they're doing a full combination of load and store. And then next lecture on we'll see what the different caches are going to look like. So, okay. So the what's happening is they're going that's the RTLK. Okay. The reorder buffer's here. Okay. The registrar is here. The instructions are going to the functional units from the reservation stations. Okay. Yes, I misspoke there. But what I'm saying is that if two instructions become available the registries that they're depending on become available. Like, do you care which one? Like, one could be more efficient to dispatch for future or later instructions. Right? Absolutely. Absolutely. Okay. So now, okay. Now, this just goes back to the previous unit over there, which is not the slide job. Well, let's go back. You know, you're splitting the reservation stations into different banks. Okay. Then, you know, once you do that then you have to have the notion of some steering logic. Which would decide which bank of reservation stations it goes to. Okay. And then further can you issue from any reservation station or only from the head of that reservation station. Okay. So we're here now, then your scheduler has to decide of the instructions that are woken up. Okay. Which one to actually schedule. And yes, you know, you you implement a scheduler which is almost certainly there will be a piece of code for which that scheduler does worse than a different one. But generally for what you're trying to do and you try to evaluate it for watch out for your benchmarks and so on like that and see, hey, you know, how well a particular scheduler would do. Can compilers not provide hints to these hardware schedulers? The question is, can the compiler not provide hint to the scheduler? Of course it can. But tell me how it would do it. The scheduler takes problem space only the number of instructions it can see. But if we have lots of interleaving, the compiler could basically organize thread to one reservation station and then like have some sort of helper bit that says okay, this is all thread 0. So might as well just put it in one queue of reservations. Okay. Compiler creates a set of bits goes away. Hardware looks at the set of bits and figures out what to do. Compiler has to convey through the set of bits something. What do you have in mind? I'm thinking we have bunch of bits pertaining to bunch of bits. We have to change the instruction set. How else do you do it? How else does a compiler create a set of bits? Compiler creates a set of instructions. So you have to have you have to have more end bits than the software creates. Sort of like the IA-64 did. Okay, but you know yes, you can have more bits. The next 600 instructions that might be coming in are all for this thread. So do your best. You could do lots of stuff. Tell lots of stuff. All that takes bits. Bits increases code size. Increases what goes in your for the same size of cache you can have fewer instructions because some of it is taken up by these end bits which may or may not be useful. And then if you could in a sense, you know, do that remember that all the interprocedural and so on if you're calling, you know, code the way people write code these days is like not stuff I ever learned. Hey, you call this library here and it gets dynamically linked and then you go to some dispatch table go somewhere else and do this wherever you don't even know. You don't even know what the code you're calling ever looks like. Or what it does. Okay. So the compiler to do all that analysis has to figure out what code you're going to be calling when you're compiling. I don't think that's going to go too well with the way a lot of people write code. I'm kind of a related question. Does it matter again like how the compiler does the register assignment if we're doing these register renames? It doesn't seem like it matters too much at all. So the the question is would it matter whether the compiler how the compiler does the register assignments? It wouldn't matter at all. So actually paradoxically, you know what compilers try to do is they try and increase the separation between loads and uses. That means you have to use more registers. Okay. That increases the live range of register values. And when you're increasing the live range of values, you and you run out of registers and you have to spill the registers to the top of the stack and bring them back in. And that seems to have worked. Okay. But what we want in some of these dynamically scheduled is precisely the opposite where we want all the instructions that are dependent on each other not to be separated by the software. Because the hardware you go, yeah, they are dependent. Put them in the same set of reservation stations. I'll deal with the others later on. So, you know, that is sort of the paradox over there where you actually try and compile the opposite. But, yeah. Okay. Now let us go to some really interesting stuff is how do you do memory operations? Okay. Loads and stores. Register, the other instructions only have register inputs and outputs and the register renaming captures all the dependencies. And tags can tell you when to execute. Except that for loads, you have register inputs also have memory inputs. Which is the result, you know, you are loading from an address. And a previous store could have written into that address. Register renaming does not tell you about all the dependencies and how you're going to find all the other instructions that are in flight. So let me just scribble out some nonsense piece of code go to some address A then I'm going to store to some address B go to some address C store to address D You know, and these are arbitrary addresses and I don't know what the addresses are. They could not be the same. A, B, C, D, E, they are just addresses. They could or could not be the same. Okay? And so now, you know if B is equal to C, alright these addresses are the same, then this load must happen after this store over here. Let's take a look at load E. Okay? If load E is the same as B, then this load must happen after this store B. But if D and E are different this can happen before this store. Okay? We talked about, you know, the integer function units, floating point function units. The data memory can also be viewed just like a functional unit. Okay? And this data memory has the data cache and the TLB plus structures and these are these load store queues that we'll talk about to handle all the loads and stores that are still in flight that are in the machine. And this memory, this function unit is going to do four things. First, it's going to store, retire the stores in order. Okay? Because, you know, you must give the appearance that the program executed in order, the stores are actually writing to memory. Once something goes to memory, some other processor, some other thread, whatever you see it. Okay? That has to be in order. So this is a basic functionality that's going to be implemented by a store queue. Then, there's also going to be the store load forwarding, which is going to allow loads to read values from order and under time. And what is this store load forwarding? Okay? So, let me go to this load here again. Okay? It's loading from address C, and the store is writing to address B, and say B and C happen to be the same. Okay? Which means, now, this load must read the value that was written by the store. Alright? How does the load go and read something across the cache? And get something from the cache? Alright? What does the store do and write something into the cache? That's how this load got it. Okay? But, this store cannot retire until it's at the head of the reorder buffer, which could be many tens of cycles away. It could take many tens of cycles in the time this value is ready until the store retires and the value ends up in memory. So, this load, if you, say, you have to wait until this value is in memory in the cache, might as well go home, you know, have lunch, come back, the load will still be there waiting to retire out of here. Okay? So, you can't do that. This load's value, the store's value, is going to be sitting in the store queue. You have to allow the load to get the value from that store queue, and that is what is called store-load forwarding. Okay? So, this store-load forwarding is going to allow loads to read values from older unretired stores. There's also basic functionality going to be implemented by the store queue, and we'll see it in detail. Okay? Life gets even more interesting where you have the store writing into four bytes, or eight bytes, and this load reading two of those bytes, or one of those bytes, or six of those bytes, or whatever. Okay? We'll make life even more interesting where we will allow load speculation. And what is this load speculation? Today I want to take a look at I have this load that's loading from address E. For this load to get the value from the correct store, if you will, it must check all the stores that are still waiting, check their addresses to see if there's a match. And only when it has those addresses, where you can compare those addresses, then it can execute safely. But that may take too long, and you know, the chances of this load executing before a prior store that still has not retired, but that still hasn't maybe executed, that's going to write to the same address that's quite low. So you will let this load speculate and execute before the store, just like we did in software. Okay? And when the store came, we recorded this address in the ALAT and the store came and checked the ALAT or whatever it is. Here we'll record this in a load queue and the store will come and check the load queue. Okay? And then we'll further make it even more interesting is we'll use prediction techniques to try and improve this accuracy of this load store speculation. Alright? So we will carry out load speculation and check to see whether there is a memory ordering violation where a load executed before a prior store, before it was dependent upon. And then we'll briefly talk about memory ordering violence ordering violation avoidance using memory dependence predictors. Okay. So here is now basically a data memory function unit. Okay? It has two inputs, just like, you know, ALU had two inputs, register inputs and one output. Here you have basically two inputs. One is the address and the other is the data input and it has one output and the output is the data output. Okay? So this has an address input, data input and a data output. Then it also has another input over here, which is an input for a load position. It's not a register, it's not a value, it's not a value, it's the position that we will see of the of a load in a store. Just like we had a reorder of an entry number. Okay? So the store queue, okay, what it has is it has multiple entries, okay, one for each in-flight store, okay, and the entries are in program order and for each entry I have the address and the value that, and corresponding to the store, when that store queue, when that entry becomes the head of the store queue in the reorder buffer, that value is going to get written to the corresponding address in the, okay? And we're going to be able to search these addresses associatively, why? So we will see. And typically it's going to be of the size of 1 sixth to 1 fifth of the reorder buffer because 1 fifth to 1 sixth of the total instructions are likely to be store instructions. Okay? Any questions about this? Basic stuff? What it does is we'll see next. Okay. So how does this work? So when you have a store, when you dispatch the store, you allocate the entry at the store queue tail. Okay? So the store queue, you know the store queue has a head and a tail, you allocate an entry at the store queue tail. Okay? When the store is executed, okay, you write the address and data into the corresponding store queue slot. Okay? So when the store executes, you write the data, the address into the entry and the data into that corresponding entry. Alright? When that store retires, you write the address and data from the store queue head to the data cache and you free that store queue tail. So basically you write the data from the value entry to the address and the address entry. And you're done. That's all fairly straightforward, nothing too interesting over there. The interesting stuff happens for loads now. Okay, so going back over here, hey, these stores are just coming, I just put them in the store queue just like I, you know, dispatch, execute, or retire. I'm like, yes. What happens for loads? Okay. When you dispatch a load, you record the current store queue tail as the load position. Okay? And when you execute the load, that's where the interesting stuff happens. Let me go back there. So say, you know, say I have this piece of code, so when I have that store queue over here, you know, I dispatch the stores and I have, you know, this is the head and this is the tail. So I have address B, address D, address F over here. Okay? Now, when I do a load of A, okay, I want to make sure that there is no other store before this that's writing to the same address A. Okay. When I do this load, I want to compare to make sure that there is no address before this load that's writing to B. Okay? When I do this load, I want to make sure that, you know, the addresses B and D are different from E. So now this piece of code is gone. I've done the loads. The load is sitting over here. When I do load C, when I do load C, I want to compare the addresses C only to B. Okay. Not to B and F because they are from stores after that. Okay? So what I want to do is now I have a position of this store when this, you know, when this load was executed or dispatched. And even though other stores came into the store queue after that, I only want to compare the address C to this address B only. Not to B and F. Okay. If D was the same as C, that's alright. I don't want the value, I mean I don't want the value from this store over here. Are you near this? So that is what this store, current store queue tail, which is this was the current store queue tail when this load C was dispatched. Okay? So I'm going to record that. Okay. So when you do a load of execution, okay, load execution, you start accessing the data cache. Okay? But there is like a 10% chance that the load, you're going to be loading from an address that is corresponding to a store value still in the store queue. So you have to bypass it, read it from the store queue. Okay? So you're going to compare with all the store addresses, B, D, F. Okay? And that's like a cam. Okay? Just like, you know, then you select all the matching addresses. And then you have this age select logic, which selects the youngest store that is older than the load. And that's what it's going to use this load position input for. If there is a match, then the load forwards the value from that selected entry in the store queue. If there is no match, then the load is going to get its value from the data cache. Okay? So, again, you know, store B, D, F got dispatched in the store queue. When this load is dispatched, the store queue tail was only for entry B. Okay? When this load got dispatched, the store queue tail was corresponding to entry B and D. The D was at the store queue tail. Okay? So now when load C gets executed, say it matches F. Okay? But not B and D. It's going to go get the value from the cache because F is occurring after this load, so the value this writes into memory will not be the value that this load is going to read from memory. So then when this load E matches over here, okay, say this load E matches matches okay. When this load to address E dispatches, it will now compare against the entries, all the entries, okay, say B matches. Alright? If B matches, now it will take all the, say B and F match. Say B and F match. Okay? The load position, the store position, the load position over here, so it will see all these matches, but these are the younger ones. B and B are the two younger entries that matched because of the load position. And B is the youngest entry that matched. B, even though it's younger, did not match. Okay? So it's going to forward the value from this entry, B in the store queue, to this load E over here. Are you with me on this? Okay. So you know, I have out of order codes, in a sense, why do we sort of, why do we sort of do that? Okay. So in general, loads can execute out of order with this, with respect to other loads. Notice I'm not comparing any load address, so the load can be, you know, I could use any I could, the loads could happen completely out of order with respect to each other. Very similarly, the stores could also execute out of order with respect to other stores. Because, you know, what's happening is they are being dispatched in order, and they could execute in any order, it doesn't matter. They just put the values in the store queue out of order. But that's not a problem. Okay. However, the loads must execute in order with respect to other stores. That's what we have to solve. Okay. And so that requires knowledge of all the other store addresses. Okay. We'll get there. Okay. And you have to do this to basically, for the load to get the correct value. Any questions? Yeah. So by executing stores out of order, you mean the address and the value is computed out of order, but accessing the cache is in order. The stores are all accessing the cache, accessing the cache is going to happen when the store retires. That will absolutely be in order. Execute is when you are writing the addresses and data into the corresponding store. I'm just scribbling this out. You know, go back to this piece of code that we had all along here. I'm loading into F1 multiplying into I'm loading into F1 multiplying with F1 as an import writing into F2 and then I'm storing F2. Okay. And then the storing F2 was an offset of C of register R1. And then say I had some other store something else. That had zero of R1, I was storing R2 to this address over here. Now, this store when we have it's going to execute only when its inputs are ready. This store is going to execute when its inputs are ready. So, this F2 is going to take a while to become ready. This import is ready, so this store could actually execute before this store. Means it's going to write the address and the register value into the corresponding entry in the store queue for this store. Okay? Are you with me on this? Which also brings up another thing. Which is another important point. So, the way I have talked about what is stored now is when the executing the store when both the address and the data are ready. Both the inputs are ready. Okay? And now a node needs the addresses of all the previous stores. To compare. Okay? So, typically what happens is that the data that the store is going to write, the store to memory takes a while to become available. Because it's a result of a computation. But the address typically is available well before it. Well ahead of time. Alright? As in this case. The store address was, you know, you would compute the store. R1 was known and the other was constant. You know, so you could add the constant to R1 and figure out the address long before you knew what was going to go in F2. Okay? Now, if I do what I just talked about. Is I have a store queue where I'm going to if I'm going to have a store queue where I write the address and the data into the corresponding store queue slot at the same time. Okay? Then I have to wait until the data is available. And then I'm comparing, for a node I'm comparing against the addresses of the store queue. Okay? So typically what you will have is you will actually break the store queue down to a store address queue and a store data queue. Okay? There will be matching entries. And you can actually write the address into the store address queue much earlier than the data. Which will allow the later nodes to carry out the comparison correctly much earlier. Because the node needs to know the address of the prior store. Are you familiar with this? And if you don't do that, then you are going to be basically making the node necessarily wait quite a long time. When we talk about memory dependence breakers we will see the alpha didn't do this. One of the alphas didn't have these separate queues. And it tried to do load speculation and got killed. Because the misspeculation took many tens of cycles longer to detect than it could have. And so they needed these dependence predictors even more. Okay. So this load execution now requires the knowledge of all the store addresses. It's simple but it restricts performance a little bit. Are you familiar with this? Yeah. Let's say that we have 20 processors on the same chip. Yeah. The load store forwarding can effectively let the load part kind of move the case coherence part. But what happens if you want something from a different processor core and like that wouldn't that like when that load comes in, so the store goes to retire, writes the value. Then some case coherence thing happens. And by the time the load comes to retire that case value has changed. Will that, what will you do then because up till now your work has been invalidated because the data you were using to work with just became invalid. That's why we have blocks and monitors and stuff like that. And cache coherency protocols and lots of things like that. It's a different problem. You start out by saying you have multiple processors on a chip. That has the multi-process could be anywhere. It could be on the chip, on the moon, whatever. You know it's like as long as you're doing a little, if you're maintaining coherence it would be those. Okay. We will towards the end of the lecture we talk about cache coherence, okay. But the only way, only way something executing on a processor is going to see something executed on a different processor is via software instructions. The software has to see it. Okay. So then that state, the software has to make sure it's protected by the locks. We'll see that when we get to the cache coherence and see if you don't put the locks then you get stuff wrong even though your coherence protocol is right. Okay. Now outside of the process in core, no one is ever seeing what's happening inside. No one is seeing anything except when we beat one advantage. But that you'll see within 7.57. Okay. Other questions? So a critical observation people have made is typically less than 10% of the loads are being forwarded. Even if older store addresses are known, chances are it's not going to bench. So, you know, store address B is not known. I'm trying to do load to address E. Chances are B and E are different addresses. So I could actually execute this E before. Somehow I happen to know that D and E. D address is known and because the stores executed out of order, the address of D is known and it's different from D. So what we want to do is this is what, you know, we started talking about the codes separating the loads from the users. You want to let the loads go as early as possible. Before prior stores whose addresses are not known. Okay. So we want to have the loads execute in the presence of ambiguous stores. You know, just like in the IA 64, you did that advanced load. What happens if the ambiguous store does match? We must detect that and we fix it. We will see how we detect it. Fixing is just like we fixed anything else. Just like a mis-speculation, we restore the state to the branch. Okay. Just like the load mis-speculated, we'll just recover the state as if the load had not even gotten out of the store. We just basically recover the state from the point of the store. Okay. So this is by now it should be complete. It may not have been last week, but last Monday, but now we should learn this. Yeah. Did you have a question? Okay. So how do we do this? This is now what the load queue does. So this is our store queue, store address, store data, load position. This load queue doesn't have any values. Because the value of a load is what it loads from memory, and it's not loading anything yet. Or even if it's loaded, that's not an interesting part. It has addresses. So it has all the in-flight load addresses in program order, and it's associated with research. Okay. So again, scientifically, typically it's going to be one-fifth to one-th, you know, 30% of there are, because that fraction of the fractions are loads. And here's what you would do. For loads, when you dispatch a load, you allocate an entry at the load queue tail, allocate an entry at the load queue tail. When you execute the load, you write the address into the corresponding load queue slot. In addition to getting the value from somewhere and putting it in the register. Okay. Stores. What a store does is it's going to record the current load queue tail as a store position. And in the execute, it's going to detect to see if there was a later load that executed before the store. Okay. Again, going back to this picture over here. Okay. So, you know, the store B hasn't executed. It dispatched, so it has an entry in the store queue. The load C comes along, executed. Okay. Store D comes along, executed. Load E comes along, executed. And these C and D executed speculatively because this address was not known. So what you will do is, what you will do is, you know, when this load executes, record the current store queue position, tail position over here. Sorry. Okay. Sorry. When this store executes, record the current load queue position as the store queue position. So that would be the tail of the load queue over here. When this store executes, the tail of the load queue corresponding to this load would be this store position. Okay. When this store executes, sorry, when this store executes, the tail of the load queue which is corresponding to this position would be the load position. Okay. Now I'm going to store executes. Okay. And it compares all the addresses of the loads to see if there's a match. If A matched, that's not a problem. But if E matched, that's a problem. This load executed before this. This load, if it executed before this, that's fine because it should have executed before this. Then what you're going to do is, you will detect that there's a violation between the address this store wrote to and then this is the, all the loads corresponding to after this load should be wiped out. Basically all the states should be wiped out. Okay. So the store queue sends the address the store sends the address to the load queue, compare with all the load addresses, compare with all the load addresses, select the matching address, if there's a matching address, there's a load executed before the store probably and there's this age selection logic selects the oldest store that is the younger than the store using the store position. Okay. Then the processor flushes and restarts from that point. Are you with me on this? Here you talk about the loads when the loads execute. We don't, the pipeline is deeper than just execute, right? Like we don't update the registers until we hit write back base, right? What do we mean by execute? Because you can't really actually I'll go back to the B6, this is easier. This is what we mean by load executing. By load executing means you wake up all the instructions after that are dependent on that write the value set the map table, etc, etc. Okay. Don't think of it, or in the R10k in the R10k what we mean by this load executing is freeing up that reservation station and then getting the value written with the correct physical register. I'm not retired yet. Different from retired. Are you with me on this? So this opportunistic scheduling, which is allow a load to execute before a previous store, was actually slightly, you know, sometimes better than this conservative scheduling, which was you had to actually wait for all the addresses to be Now appreciate over here that when I talked about in the alpha processor initially, they were not writing into the store queue until both the data and the address of the store were known. You have a storing point code, long latency operation feeding into a store this load okay, if you made it wait if you made it wait for the store address to be known, then basically you were waiting too long in the conservative schedule. But then if you did this opportunistic one you let it go before the previous store 90% of the stores there was no problem but if there was a problem then you waited much longer to detect the problem then you you could have detected the problem when the address was known when the address was known before the data that you are storing okay, are you with me on this? So the observation that some of us made is hey, these loads and stores that cause violations are stable they are a property of the program mostly program based and the program does not change okay so let's say I have a piece of code I make a call to some function alright and you know, this is my function code over here okay and how would I you know pass parameters of this call to this function or how would I pass the return value from this function back to this call okay so typically via stack, right? okay, so what do I do over here? I store to the top of the stack okay and then I load from the top of the stack and here I store to the top of the stack and here I load from the top of the stack so what you see is that, hey, now what will happen dynamically is a piece of code like this okay and you know that this load is going to be from, this load is going to be from the same address, this load is going to be from the same address as this store at this VC and if I execute this load before this store, there will be a violation if I execute this load before this store, there will be a violation however, every time I execute, every time I make this function call okay the store corresponding to this VC and the load at this VC are going to be independent and if there was some other store over here to heap somewhere, you know this load from the top of the stack if it was, did not conflict with this store the first time I ran the program one time, it's almost never going to, it's never going to conflict period, I know that okay, so these are all instructions at different BCs you know, this is PCA this is PCB this is PCC and this is PCB okay, these are all instructions, load and store instructions at different BCs, the dependence relationships between them they are either always dependent or not dependent, so these dependence relationships are mostly program based and the program does not change in some sense yeah, doesn't Intel do a lot of special stuff for their calls, churns and pops and pushes, because they have those instructions that specifically give context to a stack they do okay, they do, but still the scheduler now is basically, you know the scheduler is just saying hey, can this load go or not this is the address now, you know in comparing, this load scheduler is scheduling to see if there are prior stores many times you don't even want to wait for necessarily those stores but again, going back to this over here you know, this store at the top of the stack this was maybe waiting for some value to be created I call this instruction this load is saying, hey I'm ready to go okay, so that's when you have to do the comparison against the addresses it doesn't, you know, I mean this is a very common idiom where that's happening but there are many other places, anytime you spill registers and load them back, dependencies or many times you're writing something to a variable and you're loading back from the variable, global variable the same construct state okay, so these loads and stores that cause violations are stable and they are program based, and if they are stable then you can actually use the predict and this is something that we actually came up with many years ago, trying to figure out our own violations that we couldn't deal with for years until we came up with this and then you can store it okay I'll briefly go into the we'll come back to this slide and continue with the next couple of other slides any questions?
