Title: 752_Lec16
Source file: 752_Lec16.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Okay, let's continue with our caches then. So we were talking about the ABCs of caches, capacity, associativity, and log size. And the larger the capacity you have, the fewer the capacity misses you're going to have. But you're going to increase the egg latency. And plus, there's a limit to what the size can be. That is a whole memory hierarchy trade-off. Associativity, we'll see it's going to decrease the conflict misses. How? We'll see that. But it's going to increase the egg latency. Why? We'll see that. Block size is going to increase the capacity and conflict misses because there are fewer primes and we'll see that. But it's going to perhaps decrease some compulsory and the less capacity misses, some of the spatial precetions, we'll see that. And it really has no effect on the head latency. Again, we'll see that. But it's going to increase the miss latency. May increase that and we'll see why that's the case. So let's take these one by one. And in general, if you do a plot of the miss rate versus the cache size, and it has some curve that looks like this where it decreases initially quite rapidly and then it's still going to increase degrees but we're diminishing returns after a certain point. However, the bigger cache is of course going to have more of a head latency. And typically, there is some size of a cache that in a sense works well for a program. However, when you have a workload, you typically have multiple programs. And furthermore, even during, within a program, there are phases that have different demands for different workloads. Okay, so people try and do a lot of analysis or different workloads, do lots of simulations like of the kind that you've been doing and try and get an idea of what cache size works well enough. And of course, this is not the only, miss rate is not the only parameter. There's also the access latency, how many resources you have available to use for this, how many total resources you have, what else you could use it for, et cetera, et cetera. So, just increasing the cache size, changing the cache size in a sense is quite boring. It's like whatever resources you have, how much budget you have, that is going to impact your cache size. But the block size and the associativity, there are lots of issues over there. So let's spend some time talking about those. Okay, the block size is the size of, you know, data that you're moving between the cache and the memory or between one level of the memory and the next level of the memory. And what you have to do now is your cache is going to have some number of blocks over here. Okay, so previously the cache, previously the cache that we had, had blocks of 32 bytes and I had one K of them. And if I increase the block size, say I make it 512 bits, for the same size of cache, which is 32 kilobytes, okay, I'm going to have a fewer number, half the number, if I double the blocks, I'm going to have half the number of block frames of the blocks to be put. Okay, notice the total size of the cache hasn't changed. It's just how I've organized it. I have, you know, bigger blocks and fewer block frames. So what does happen is that the number of bytes, bits, the bits that select the byte within each block. Now if I had 64, you know, byte blocks, then I have to have two to the sixth of six bits, 64, and I have to select between 64 bytes. So I have to have two to the sixth, six bits of address to select between one of those two to the sixth bytes, okay. So the way I split up my address is six bits, bottom six bits are going to select the byte within the 64 byte block. Then the next nine bits are going to be an address of the particular block frame I'm going to access, okay. And the remaining bits of the tag and the tag bits haven't changed the size of the cache hasn't changed. So I am actually reducing the tag overhead. Why am I reducing the tag overhead? Because the size of the tag hasn't changed but now rather than having one K, I only have five, 12 tags, okay. So if tag storage is, overall storage is important, that is a plus for a larger block size. A larger block size is also going to exploit spatial locality. So if I'm referencing some address and with a larger block size, I'm going to bring other addresses around it. So when I go and reference that other address, if I do have spatial locality, I'm going to have a hit rather than a miss. However, now there are multiple negatives. One is that if I'm referencing 64 bytes and I bring in 64, okay, if I don't reference some of those other bytes, then I'm transferring that data unnecessarily, it's useless and that's going to be more bandwidth. Furthermore, there's going to be fragmentation. So if I'm not using data that's there in the block, then in effect that much of the cache I'm not using. Okay, so if I only use half the data in each block, then effectively I'm only using half the cache. And furthermore, because now I can have fewer different blocks in the cache, okay, so I'm likely to replace a block that I could be using because I have fewer blocks that I can have. Okay, you with me on this? Okay. So these two effects, there are two effects on miss rate, the spatial prefetching. So, you know, if I'm referencing adjacent addresses, if I have, you know, two blocks, you know, I'd miss the first time on one block, second time on the next block. If they're particular and I combine them into one block, I would have only one miss. Okay, so rather than having the miss miss on two blocks, I'd get a miss and a hit on those same addresses. However, there's the interference because blocks that are not adjacent in adjacent frames, they could be conflicting. So I could have had hits over that, but now because those cannot be resonant simultaneously, I end up having misses. Both these effects are present. So typically, you know, you see a curve like this as the block size increases. Initially, the spatial prefetching dominates, reduces the miss rate, but after a point, the interference increases. And so typically, I end up having a point where I have a, you know, good block size, if you will. It's gonna depend on the size of the cache. It's gonna, of course, depend on the program referencing pattern. And, you know, typically, you know, 16 to 128 byte blocks at 64 is a very common block size people use. Okay, so that's the block size, affected the block size and the miss rate. The tag overhead now, if I had the 32 kilobyte cache with 1K and 32 byte frames, I have, you know, the 17 bits plus one bit overhead times so many frames at 16 kilobits of tags, 2.2 kilobytes, that's about a 6% overhead. Now, if I had 64 byte blocks, I only have five, 12 of them. So now I have 18 bits of overhead times five, 12 frames, that's nine kilobits or 1.1 kilobits. That's, you know, half the overhead. Questions? So I'm actually not gonna go through the, you know, this chart over here. You can see the same reference pattern, and, you know, some previously things that were hits that misses become hits, and sometimes previously that were hits become misses. The hits, because of the spatial locality misses because of the interference that will come. You can take this off of mine. All right. So now let's see how things become a little more involved and interesting. So here is my cache, and, you know, here is, say, my memory audit could be the second level cache or whatever it is. Okay? And I'm moving, whenever, you know, when I'm moving information back and forth, it is entire cache blocks. Okay? And this is going to be moved over a set of wires, and that is going to be N bytes, white. Okay? So if now I'm moving a block size of P bytes, and I'm only moving N bytes per cycle, I'm going to take B over N cycles to actually move that block in. Correct? So let me say I took one cycle to hit in the cache, and 10 cycles to miss in the cache. Okay? So the hit latency is one, and the miss latency is 10. Right? Well, not quite, because the miss latency is the time to access the data plus the time to transfer this data. Okay? So if my block size was 64, and I was transferring eight bytes at a time, then it's going to take me eight cycles to transfer the entire block over. All right? So this miss latency is going to be the 10 cycles to access this plus the eight to transfer this block over. Okay? The larger my block size, now the larger the miss latency. Question. Okay? So when I say the block size may increase the latency of a miss, now you see what that's doing over there. Latency of the miss is increasing. Okay? And the latency of the hit isn't increasing because I'm reading the entire block, and then shifting that entire 64 bits, and shifting whatever I need to pull out that exact set of bytes I'm reading over there. Yes? Those two clocks, like the hit latency, we're talking about essentially the processor is clock speed, right? But the memory bandwidth is substantially, or the memory's clock is way slower than the CPU. So yeah. So this is just some numbers up there. Okay. So, you know, I mean, assume that second, what I'm saying memory is the second level of cache. Okay. Well, like if that was L2 though, that thing gets to move, it moves data between L2 and L1 is cache line wide, isn't it? It depends. Cache line wide is, you know, quite wide. 512 bytes in a real machine. 512 bits. Bits. Bits. Yeah. You know, it depends. Okay. And then still would be the L2 and the L2 and L3 or whatever it is in memory. Eventually, if this is going off memory, okay, the width of the bus is going, if it's going off the chip, the width of the bus is going to determine how many pins I need to have on that package. The number of pins, in addition to being able to, whether you can put them or not, that also adds a lot of expense too. Okay. All right. So it's never going to be the case that you're just going to be dumping that cache on the entire block in one shot. Okay. So what can we do? Okay. What we can do is, you know, larger cache blocks take a long time to refill. So what you can do is, you can actually refill this cache line critical word first. All right. So, you know, say I had a, you know, 64 point, you know, cache block. Okay. Whatever. Okay. And I make a reference to this word over here. Okay. So rather than start from this word and transfer the words one by one like yay, this is the critical word. I will send this back to the processor. Okay. Let the processor start going. In which case now, the latency for that access is still only going to be the latency to get the critical word. And then the time that it takes to transfer the cycle that it takes to transfer that can be happening as the processor is doing its stuff. Okay. So refill the cache line critical word first and restart the cache access before the complete refill, if you will. All right. Put the critical word first, right? What if they are not properly aligned? Let's say that we are fetching, but if they are not in the sixth ring, they're not in the first 64, first 16 bits or something like that. If they're kind of somewhere in the middle, then we will have to have extra logic that takes that first, that maybe some memory complexity down the line. Forget memory. Say this is a second-level cache too. Okay. You have to have logic that figures out rather than transferring, having a counter starting from this address and counting up, you have to first do this and then count the others in. Remember that this was done. Yeah, it's a little extra logic, but hey, it's saving on a lot of latency. Okay. All right. So restart that before the complete refill over there. Are you with me on this critical word first? Okay. When going forward, we'll see what a lockup-free or non-locking cache is. Now, while this word, while this line is being transferred, I gave, and I'm not waiting for the entire line to let the processor go to be transferred. Okay. The processor goes, gets its word, starts it, you know, doing its thing, and makes another reference to the same cache line. A different word in that cache line. Okay. We'll see what happens when something in that happens. Or even if there's no mess. Okay. So you have to actually then keep track of which all sub-blocks of that cache block have been transferred. And then if you have another reference to a sub-block, you have to determine whether it was transferred or whether you're waiting for it still to be transferred. All right. But, hey, you know, the easy thing is, yeah, I'm gonna wait for the entire block to be transferred. You can do that. If you like doing things slow, that's fine. Sometimes people like doing things slow. Okay. You're just going to increase latency significantly with that. Okay. Now, the other thing that people do is they say, look, you know, if I have a larger, if I have a larger block, then say, I'm making a reference to this part of the block, this part of the block, and this part of the block, and not the other parts of the block. Okay. So, should I even transfer the other parts of the block? Because it's going to waste bandwidth. All right. And so, what you can do is, you can divide the block into sub-blocks. You still have only one tag. Okay. Rather than transfer the entire block, you only transfer the sub-blocks as you reference the sub-blocks. Okay. And then you have to have a valid bit for each sub-block. Now, you may ask me, hey, what's the, you know, why did you do this? What are you saving? You aren't saving any fragmentation in the cache because you still reserve the entire block in the cache for the data even that you want to transfer. Okay. But you are saving on the tag. You only have one tag for the entire block. Now, you have some extra valid bits over here. But you aren't also that, you aren't, you're saving on the busband where if that is, you can still resource that you see as your own option. Okay. By only, by not transferring data that you haven't referenced. Are you paying on the sub-block cache? Actually, the very first cache was a sub-block cache. It was called a sector cache because what you're saying now, block has multiple sectors and you are transferring sectors of that and you saved a lot of the data over there. And, you know, I mean, you know, with a sparse access pattern, if you have S sub-blocks, you could only be referencing one block in effect using only one S of the cache. You know, that is what you have to do. You have to do all your studies to figure out and see, hey, does it make sense to do a sub-blocking? What should be the block size, et cetera, et cetera. But this critical word first, there's something that is that everyone has questions. Yeah. So are these, does modern DIM support this sub-blocking like this? Though this has nothing to do with the DIM. You know, from the DIM, you are just unnecessarily assembling the entire line, if you will. But the transfer over to the processor depends on whatever logic you have. So that's in the chipset side of it. It's not like, so the memory is not coming here. The bits aren't coming out of the memory in parallel. Are they? No, no, no, no. I mean, you can, you know, the bits, they get assembled somewhere on the memory end and then they have to be transferred over based on the width. Right. But so like in a modern DIM, can we take advantage of the sub-block or not? Because at some point you're limited by what the DIM is going to do. It's gonna send, it'll have to send it all out. It's like, no matter. It sends it out, but you don't have to transfer it to the processor. That, it depends on your memory controller. Okay. All right. So the logic, you know, you could have the entire, you know, in fact, you know, a lot of the, you know, you see when we talk about memory, you actually read entire pages, if you will, you know, like the entire, you read the entire set of columns. You read the entire row, okay? And then how much of that row and how you want to transfer it depends upon the controller. Isn't it? Soft, logically, having more associativity, in a sense, you know, having to pay for the... That is, and it is absolutely not more associativity. It is just very simply, I want, I'm having a larger block, and a larger block allows me to have fewer tags. Storage. And now, rather than transfer data I'm never going to use and waste plus bandwidth, I am saving on the transfer of that data and saving on that bandwidth. All right. But, you know, this also feeds in very naturally to this critical word for us, okay? Because we are going to be, in a sense, transferring sub-blocks, and while this may not be in the cache, somewhere there is something, we will see in the misstatus handling registers, where this stuff happens, is there. Even if you're transferring all the sub-blocks, because these bandwidths for to indicate the validity of that sub-block has been transferred, is there. Okay? So, you know, I mean, the thing to remember, you know, at a high level is, we're going to be learning several tricks, okay? And the tricks are played, and you have this bag of tricks, you know? Given the situation, you can decide what bag of tricks, which tricks from your bag of tricks makes sense to use at that particular instance. Okay. So, all right. So, we'll get back to a little bit more about block sizes and so on when we talk about non-blocking caches. But, so, now, you have access fantasy that given any cache, you know, a cache size, and, you know, regardless of block size, you're going to keep generating misses, because both of these aren't going to be resident in the cache simultaneously. Again, I won't go through this, you can go through this and see, hey, yeah, you are getting misses over here, because you cannot have, you know, 3030 and 0030 resident in the cache at the same time, given that the, you know, what bits, how I was indexing and accessing the frames of the cache. Okay? So, to deal with conflicts, I am going to have set associativity, where previously, if I, you know, in the cache that I had over here, you know, a particular block could be resonant in only one and only one block frame in the cache. Okay, and that was determined by the index bits over here. Okay? Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to say that a block can be resonant in more than one frame in the cache. And the number of block frames that a block could reside is called, you know, the number of them is the associativity of the cache. And then, my total 1K frames that I had, if you will, I'm going to divide them into a bunch of sets, and each set, I'm going to have a set of block frames and each frame in a set is called a wave over here. Okay? So, here is a cache where a frame, at this frame, I have, at this set, I have frame zero and 512, so a block could reside in either, block in set zero could reside either in frame zero or in frame 512. So, I have two waves over here, and so, the number of waves is what's called the associativity, and here is what I have, a two-way set associative cache. The way I'm going to access the set associative cache, okay, number of bytes within a block is still the same. Then, the index bits over here are going to select a set. Okay? So, if I have now 512 sets, I'm going to have nine bits of index to select one of the 512 sets. Then, I will read all the data and all the frames in a set in parallel, and the tags of those, and then I'll compare with the tag of the address. If there is a match, then I will, through this multiplexer, select one of those two blocks that I have read and pull out the exact byte from that block. Okay? So, now, what an addition that I have over here is, I'm reading more than one block, I'm reading as many blocks as there are waves in a set, and then I have a multiplexer that's going to take and determine which one of these blocks am I actually going to read, and this additional logic over here is going to increase the latency of accessing data in the cache, so I can see it increasing this hit latency. Okay? You all seen this before, right? Okay? Now, you get me on this? We'll make it a lot more interesting. Okay? So, you know, what is there is a two-way set associated cache. If I have only one way, if I have only one way, okay, that is what we had all over, previously was a direct map cache. If I have only one set, and so all the block frames are in different ways of it, it is a fully associated cache. I use the index bits to find a set, read the data and tags and all the frames in parallel, and any match, any one of these batch, I have a hit, and the, you know, the bit indexes, now I have only nine bits versus 10 bits that I had previously, and I have the same number of bits in the tag, the number of bits in the tag hasn't changed, okay? Now, notice that block zero through five 11 are in this way, in different sets. Block five 12 is in set zero, first in way number one, five 13 is in way number one of set one, et cetera. Okay? You've seen this before, okay? Soon we will see this numbering, we can make it different, why we may want to make it different, and how we make it different, okay? There is nothing magic about this numbering here, in a set associated cache, but this is the natural numbering. So again, I'm not going to go through this to show you, you can go off, you know, is how previously, you know, what were misses become hits because you were able to avoid a conflict. So again, you study how much associativity you can have by doing a lot of simulations, and higher associativity tends to have better miss rates. However, the hit latency can increase. Why does the hit latency increase? Because if I now have a four-way set associative, I'm reading four blocks in parallel, and I'm doing four of these comparisons against tags, and this multiplexer now is selecting one of four for the hit latency increases, okay? And so typically, the curve that you get is, that's the, you know, this is a direct map cache, and then this is a fully associated cache over here, and the miss rate decreases, and there are diminishing returns for a, you know, single thread, if you will, and there is some associativity beyond which the decrease isn't, you know, that much, if you will. So this curve says, I have a five, this is a mistake. Associativity needs to be a power of two. That's like a cache size needs to be a power of two. 40, it should be four. Associativity can be not a power of two, why not? It's just, why? How would it? Associativity doesn't map to any bits in the address, so you can have anything you want. It would be wasted space, so it's better to have a power of two. Yeah, so bits. The tag doesn't tag to the weights, it just simply randomly puts. That's why you get the 192-meter-long R. It weighs into the set, like the multiplexer, you make a two is two four multiplexer, and if you just occupy three of them, four is just a step, so it's there, right? It has a, it's naked, and it's all there. Okay, how many people say five is correct? I can have an associativity that's not a power of two. How many say you have to have a power of two? Majority rules, sorry. Except majority typically is wrong. So, that's why you don't get majority rule. But, again, if we're doing this on a software simulation, we can't do it. No, let's go. What is associativity? Okay, associativity is how many ways I read in parallel and select one of those, okay? Anytime I'm using bits to select something in the cache, that something needs to be a power of two, okay? What am I using bits to select in the cache? I'm using bits to select a set. So the set has to be a power of two. Number of sets has to be a power of two. How many blocks, frames, are in each set? This can be anything, because I'm reading all of them in parallel, and I'm selecting one of them. If it is three, then this is basically going to be a three-to-one multiplexer, and you're saying, hey, I know how to do a four-to-one multiplexer, two bits import, four, you know, two bits select, four bits import, and I select one of them. If I have a three-to-one multiplexer, one of the imports I want to use, who cares? Okay, the hardware isn't in the multiplexer. The hardware is in the storage, okay? So not only is a associativity that's not a power of two meaningful, it is very widely used, okay? And why is it very widely used? It is very widely used because you do a cache. Again, you figure out, you know, this is how much fast storage I can have. This is some area of the chip where this is going to go. This is where something else is going to go. You know, by the way, I have this much area of the chip left over. I cannot have double the cache size, but maybe I could add a little more, okay? And the only way I can add a little bit more than my cache size becomes not to be a power of two, and to do that, I can have a cache size that's not a power of two by having an additional way in the associativity, okay? So the, you know, the number of ways need not be a power of two. The associativity, which is the number of ways, need not be a power of two, okay? And it is widely, very commonly, not a power of two. Going back to a Qualcomm processor, 192 kilobyte cache, six-way associative, okay? Not a power of two. So this typically is going to be 64. It's going to be six ways of 32-gauge, okay? So if it's a, I don't know what the block size is. I'm assuming it's a 64-byte block. If it's a 64-byte block, okay, and I have 32 K bytes in each way, then it is, I have 512 SATs, okay? So I have 512 SATs, six-way set associativity, 64-byte block for this instruction cache over here. Definitely not a power of two. And if I go take a look at the data cache, 96 kilobyte, six-way, okay? So it's 16 kilobytes per way, six ways, 96 kilobytes in total, 64-byte block size, asset coherency, granularity. So 16 kilobytes per way divided by 64, sorry. Yeah, that is 256 SATs going to be there in this cache. Okay, are you going to be on this? By the way, there was a time that many professors also said that cache has to be a power of two. Associativity is a power of two, so, you know. And these non-power of two associativities, non-power of two size caches were very rarely used. In fact, the first time, you know, we had one, like, are you sure that's right? It must be off. Questions about this? So you talk about latency increase in for this, but like, the latency candidate, the change if it's two-way versus four-way, like it's really just that multiplexer deciding which one to, which set to, or cache line to return, isn't it? Yes, yes, okay. But you're reading all of these in parallel, okay? Transferring all that data to that multiplexer and then the wires and the wire length and all that. But really, all you have to do is make it so that it runs fast enough that you get to do it in one clock cycle. And at that point, you don't care about the, if you can get it done in that amount of time, you don't care about the latency, do you? Or is it just too hard to get it to happen in a single clock cycle? Well, okay, okay, okay, okay. So, yes, yes, I care about getting it done in one CPU clock cycle. And if I have enough left over in the clock cycle, then maybe whatever it is, latency doesn't matter. And in a single clock cycle, having that extra relay for that latency, people found it very hard. But these days, even level one caches aren't accessed in a single clock cycle, okay? They take three or four clock cycles to access. You have a little more leaving, you get that extra for that six-day associated meeting. Okay, so again, like I said, there is no this or that, okay? So we're just learning what the issues are on the bricks and in that particular situation. More than two more followers on the same thing. We get that, we get that. Okay, other questions? So now, previously when we had that previous cache and direct mapped and I made a reference to a block, I looked in the cache to see if it was there, not there, there was only one place I would look, okay? And now, if it's not there, then I go to that one place and replace whatever the old block was there and put the new block in. When I have a set associated cache now, I have a choice as to in which frame of the set should I put the block, okay? Then I just bring in the cache. Or alternatively, which block to actually kick out? So then I had to come up with a replacement policy and there are a variety of replacement policies that have been proposed, okay? Many years ago, Biladi, there were lots of people proposing different replacement policies. He said, hey, let's see what you could do. What is the optimum policy? So that ends up being sort of the bar against which you compare your replacement policies. Now, if you've taken an operating system class, you'll see very similarly, you have these replacement policies over here, okay? And we'll talk about them a little bit, okay? The one difference between what gets done in an operating system and what gets done in a cache is in the operating system, it gets implemented in software, okay? You can spend many tens of clock cycles, or hundreds of clock cycles perhaps, to figure out the implementation of the replacement policy. In a cache, it's all done in hardware, so it has to be very, very quick. And that limits the options that you get. So, you know, one option is random, that just pick any of those blocks at random, okay? Fairly straightforward to implement. It actually does reasonably well, but not that bad. Another one is now just, you know, you're used to keeping head and tail pointers all over the place now, okay? You could just keep head and tail pointers and figuring out, doing FIFO order, replace the blocks in FIFO order. The least recently used is a policy that people are well aware of, studied. You know, a block that is recently used is least likely to be used in the future, okay? However, implementing a least recently used policy in a cache can get to be quite complicated, all right? But you really try, you know, another policy that people talk about and use is, hey, you know, maybe random is fine, but I really don't want to reference the block that I referenced most recently because I'm likely to reference it, okay? So I can have a not most recently used policy, okay? And which is basically, don't choose the block that I most recently referenced, but then any of the others I can get now. It's a easy implement. We'll see how we implement this in the next slide. And if it's a two-way set associated cache, it's effectively, if it's not the most recently used, then it is the least recently used. Okay, so what you can do now is, here is a two-way set associated cache. I have now a most recently used field with each set. And what you do now is that, you know, whenever you reference, you know, whenever you read the cache, reference the cache, you go read both the block frames or all the block frames in the cache, figure out whichever data you're going to get, you know, select one, figure out which one is a hit. And then, and that is the control of the multiplexer to figure out which block you're going to use. But now, this hit pattern then also gets fed into which one of these is the zero or one, is the way, which was the way that was most recently referenced. You can set this most recently used field in here, okay? If there were a four-way set associated cache, then this would be two bits to indicate which one of those ways would be most recently. And this is fairly straightforward. Now, you just have to see this bit to figure out, this set of bits to figure out which one to replace or not. Which one not to replace, and then you can replace one here. Questions about these? Okay, now let's start getting a little more interesting. What we've been saying so far is when you go and reference a set associated cache, you read the tags and the data in parallel. You compare the tags, check to see which one of the tags match, and then select that data and send it as your output. Nothing is to say that the data and the tags need to be physically in the same place. Generally, they're not. You can have them anywhere. The tags are going to be determined to figure out whether you have a hit or not, and the data is basically after deciding which one of the blocks you want to activate. So the data and tags are physically separate. So you store all the tags in some SRAM, which you would typically call the tag array, because all the SRAM storage is arrays of storage. And this would be the data array. So here's a four-by-set associated cache, and it has four sets. So what you would do now is you would give the index to both the tag and the data arrays, select the appropriate set of tags and the set of data, compare all the tags, and then have that as a control of the multiplexer, and select this over here. And that's a parallel axis. Four blocks transferred from this data array over here, and one of those four blocks selected. So how is this different from what we were looking at? Other than the blue is now on the left, and the white is on the right side by side, but functionally, everything is coming out of the, you're still pulling four tags down, you're still pulling four block cache lines down. It's a different picture, functionally it's the same. Okay. Exactly the same. Okay. Up until here. Now it's not. Oh, now it's different. Okay. Even the picture looks different. Yes. So now what I'm gonna do is, this entire storage array is going to be, you know, pretty much like what we had in the direct map cache case. The tag array is going to be pretty much what we had in this parallel access case. For your associative cache. Okay. You are going to first match the tags, and now combine, matched tags will give you which way matched, combine which way matched with the set number to select only one block frame. Read only one block frame. So, you know, again, I repeat that. You have a serial tag and data access that you first access the tag, figure out the match, figure out where exactly in the data array the data resides, and then access that data array. And you're saying, why would you do that? It's slow. Yes, it is slow. You're first accessing the tags and then the data. Latency increases. However, there are many advantages. The first advantage now you can see obviously is I'm not reading four blocks. Not trying to spend four blocks. I'm reading only one block. Okay. That saves a fair amount in. Okay. Second is that now this data could be wherever. The tags could be close to the processor. Okay. So you can determine whether you have a hit or a miss and then access the data. In many situations, you would have the tags on the same chip, but the data in a different chip. This is now you're talking really big caches. Level three caches. Okay. And you know, if you go get a chip, it's like the caches in a 3D, you know, pin connected, whatever it is, because if you want to have a huge cache, just cannot put it on the chip, but you want to have the tags on the chip to see. You don't have that fast tag. Determination of whether you're gonna have a hit or a miss. If, you know, so if I wanted to keep the data off chip, but the tags on chip with the serial access, I could only do one block transfer. If I wanted to do the parallel access, I'd have to do the multiple reads of the data over there and a lot of pins over here. All right. So the serial tag access, it's also becomes common. Now you're saying, you're saying, hey, it's slow. Instead of doing all this in parallel, you know, it's slow. Well, say it took me two cycles to access the tags and it took me, you know, 10 cycles to access the data over here. Then the latency of a accessing this, if I did the parallel access, it would be 10. If it were serial, it will be two plus 10, if you will call for it, okay? So that's a huge difference. If the latency to access was 100, and say it took five to access the tags, now I'm doing, you know, parallel access would be 100, serial would be 105, much less of a performance, okay? So when you have situations where you're trying to have large caches and, you know, this could be now a level three cache on the chip. This could be maybe a level three cache on the chip, not 100 cycles, say if you have 40, 60 cycles on the work list, now making two cycles to access that. Or when I'm going out to having the cache in the memory, you know, it takes a couple of hundred cycles, then this is much less of an issue. So serial tag access is also routinely used for slower caches, if you will, that are slow enough already, that you don't want to have to read the entire data for the energy and also the, because you aren't going to compromise too much of the latency. Latency is big enough already. Are you with me on this? Yeah. With out-of-order processor and all the tips and tricks we learned for speculation and, you know, stuff that can still keep happening. We can make a case for, like, having the serializer even in the smaller, like, if we have the first case, right, where it's 10 cycles versus 12. If we have a large enough ROV, we have some good support from the software pipeline as well. We could, like, be like, this serial saves us power and we don't do much more for the sake of it. Yes. Everybody hear that point? He's saying is, hey, you know, if my latency increased from 10 to 12, okay, then when I have this out-of-order processor with, you know, 500 instruction window, whatever it is, it could probably tolerate the 12 cycle run and then increase, the two cycle increase over from 10 to 12 and the answer is yes. What's the advantage of doing that? The advantage is power failings for doing that. So yes, this is absolutely, you use this when you are trying to get a lower power solution where the performance may or may not be compromised as much. You wouldn't necessarily do this for an L1 cache, okay, but for the L2 and L3 caches. Also, with the dynamic voltage frequency scaling stuff, are they fast enough, those PLLs, that, you know, while if it's in a single-threaded mode and we are stuck with behind a L3 cache access, like, for those 50 cycles when it's coming back, would we, like, reduce the frequency? No, no, no. No, the frequency voltage scaling is done at a much higher, much higher frequency, much more, yeah. No, you know, it's like, you know, trying to change it at that clock cycle level because it's, see, it's not that things are completely quid-assed and waiting. Stuff is going on. You don't wanna change frequency when stuff is going on. Okay, so, I can get the best of both worlds. Okay, and what you can do is you can actually get a, you know, serial, effectively, accessing the low-power advantage of serial access, but still the best, by basically doing what is called a wave prediction. Okay, so what you use is you use the index plus some tag bits and select a wave, select another table, a predictor, which is going to tell you, predict which wave am I accessing? And so, you know, what you would do is while you're accessing the tag, you would access the wave predictor, and this is very simple, pretty much access it instantly, if you will, and combine the output of the wave predictor with the set number and then select only one. So, you can get the fastness, in a sense, you're accessing the data while you're still accessing the tag, because this is very, very, you know, simple table over here. And you can get the low-power by accessing only one frame over here. But the advantage now is if this predictor was wrong, then I have to go and read the correct frame from there. And so, so everyone, pretty much everyone uses this gash as a wave predictor for a level of the gash. How does this jive with your replacement policy? Because, you know, to make the wave predictor fairly accurate, you want to do something so that that cash line is, when you decide where to place it, you kind of want the wave predictor to make you the guess when it happens. You, so, when you replace something, you know which way you're going to replace it. You know, you're going to predict you're going to be asking the same block and set the wave predictor to that way. So, in a sense, if you have it in the same block, spatial locality, you know, you're going to get that wave predictor. If you just said, hey, you predict the same way that I accessed last time, I'll give you the right thing. Let's try that again, okay? You know, say I had a mess, you know, I didn't replace the most recently used, I replaced something else, okay? And the wave predictor, say it's set to predict the most recently used way is the way, okay? So, as long as I'm accessing the most recently used way, I'm getting it right. And now, I have a mess. I select some block, wait. Now, this block that I've missed and brought in becomes the most recently used, the wave predictor and the set of the most recently used. And now, when I'm referencing the other bytes of the words in this block, the wave predictor's looking good. So, the wave predictor, in this case, has a bunch of state, essentially one for each set. One for each set, yes. It's predicting which wave you're going to access. Now, what is this more misses? This miss that I'm having in quotation marks over here is the data is in the cache, but it is in a different wave from the one I predicted, okay? So, say I was accessing this in one cycle, then this miss actually is something that will be serviced in the next cycle I go access the other. And you're saying, oh, you know, how the hell does this jive with what we previously learned with the speculative, the scheduling, and you're actually, you know, saying I need to know how long the latency of the operation is to send the tags to broadcast three cycles ahead, if you will, latency three cycles, for the instruction can be woken up, that is going to use the result of this load. And I assume the cache it was going to take three cycles and the wave predictor is correct and the wave prediction is wrong. Now, I have to do what? Okay. And I briefly mentioned that that time is you have to, in case of a cache miss, replay that load instruction and all the instructions that came that used the value of that load instruction. Okay. So this would be also covered under that replay. So this is not a replay that would be a 10 cycle, wait for 10 cycles and replay, this would happen as a replay of just an additional cycle. Are you with me on this? Regressively required to be, are they okay if that's the reason? You know, I don't know the answer to that because I don't, never seen, never seen the accuracies of the wave predictor that were disclosed by anyone. Maybe somewhere someone did it, I've never seen it first hand. You know, but you can do it in simulators and see how well you can, try different wave predictors and get them right. It's not as simple as it is talked about, necessarily. But yeah, people have these wave predictors. But, you know, this is now more, also for an example of into my instruction scheduling. I'm already building in the hardware support to schedule as if I had a cache hit. And then when a cache miss happens, the replay that set of instructions. Okay. And now this would be another type of cache miss. Of course, you know, you think, okay, what happens, like, they would have made another load, schedule already to access the cache at that cycle. And so you have to, and now I have to access the cache twice for one load, if you will, but in different ways. So yeah, you have to take some of those, you know, arbitration and scheduling stuff into consideration, right? You know, you have transistors, you have smart people, and a lot of money to be made if you do it right. Yes, what happens? Okay. So the, you know, how do I, you know, we talked about this three models. How would I typically identify different types of conflicts? And this is, you know, something I'm doing a simulation with. Compulsory is also called a code miss. You've never seen this address before, and that would even miss in a easy internet cache. When you're doing a simulation, that's easy to do. The first time you see an address, it's going to be, and it's a miss, it's a compulsory miss. A capacity miss is called because the cache is too small, and so you would have a miss even in a fully associated cache. And the way you would identify this is you basically keep track of, you know, if I have a cache of size N, I would keep track of N most recent block references. If I make a new reference, that is not in this N, that is a miss, and that would be a capacity miss. And whatever other misses are, you know, people say, hey, that's, you know, classify that as a conflict miss. That's because it was caused because the cache is so small. And, you know, you're saying, hey, this makes for good academia, good questions, maybe on a homework or exam, but who cares? Okay. And, you know, because you're going to have different techniques for attacking the different types of misses. So let us see some of those techniques. This is just a simulation to basically identify, you know, which one of the misses was a compulsory capacity or conflict miss. Again, I'm not going to go into that. Before I do that, before I go there, I did mention a little while ago when we first talked about conflict misses, is, hey, conflict, the number of conflict misses I can have could actually be negative. What does that mean? That means that a cache with a lower associativity has more hits and fewer misses than a cache with a higher associativity. Okay? So if I had a cache with a lower associativity have more misses than a cache with higher associativity, then the associativity is actually increasing the number of misses, not decreasing the number of misses. And the associativity is what conflict misses are about, so I'm actually getting a negative conflict miss. Are you with me on this? It's sort of like, you know, a paradoxical situation. Wouldn't that be very workload dependent? Wouldn't that be very workload dependent? Everything is workload dependent in life. Okay? But let me give you sort of a real life situation where this happens, and it actually seems to happen more than it should, but it does. I'll go through this, I'll just, I'll tell you the situation, and then you can go after class and figure out whether that's true or not, okay? So say I have a cache of four blocks, block B0, B1, B2, B3, okay? And I have a piece of code that has, you know, code, you know, code block, a code castling C0, C1, C2, C3, C4, so five blocks, and it is executing them. So what'll happen? Okay, C0. Okay, map to B0, fine. There was a miss, I brought it in. C1 hit, C2 hit, C3 hit, C4, okay? If it were a direct map cache, C4 would go away. All right, C1 hit, C2 hit, C3 hit, C, you know, C0 miss, replace C4, okay? C1 hit, C2 hit, C3 hit, C4, oops, map hit, here again, miss, replace C0, okay? So I would have three hits, two misses per iteration with a direct map cache. Say this is a fully associated cache, and I use LRU replace, all right? C0 would go here, C1 would go here, C2 would go here, C3 would go here, okay? C4 would kick out C0, okay? C1, C0 would kick out C1, miss, okay? C1 would kick out C2, and miss. C2 would kick out C3, and miss. So basically I have everything is a miss. It would be a miss. So here now, my fully associated cache with LRU replacement has many, many more misses than this direct map cache. And this looping bottom of code, whether it is a loop, per se, or whether you're calling something else and something else, and then come and come back here and go do this and go get the next token and do whatever it is, et cetera, et cetera, with it, it's actually quite frequent. So you actually see this behavior is not extremely rare. It happens a fair amount of time for a particular code, for a particular situation, code access in which you're having, you have this repeated loop pattern where the size of the loop is bigger than the size of the code. And the higher the associativity, the worse it becomes, okay? Are you with me on this? Random replacement can help you a little bit. Yes, random replacement will help. Quite a bit, yeah, a little bit, yes. And do what? Change the associativity of the cache? Probably. But the way we talk about how to change the associativity of the cache, and typically you have to do this by reducing the cache. When we have the compiler who should know all this and then try to mark it up to do it. No, you have to know what hardware you're running it on, the associativity of the hardware. Only when you're doing benchmarking do you actually compile your code for that machine. You realize you don't know what machine that code is running on. The code's not been looped C and E, right? It's not even your code. Well, and somewhere else, like I said, go somewhere else, who knows, wherever dynamically got linked, one day, who knows what happened, I give it water, just like, you know, so. Okay, I'd like to stop here then. Projects, please, what's going on? You said it's available.
