Title: 752_Lec21
Source file: 752_Lec21.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

instruction operating on a single data combination isn't very sort of clean. Okay, so the SIMD is what we will be talking, people will be referring to this as SIMD parallelism, which is basically you're carrying out the single operation repeatedly on multiple data elements. It's less general than our ILP marble because you have to, the parallel instructions, they're the same operation that you have to carry out on all the different data elements. Okay, go back to a simple SAXP code over here that we had. Okay, we've seen this code before and I was doing this loop, 100 iterations of the loop. Okay, and so, and here what I can do is each one of these iterations I'm carrying out are independent, so I'm operating upon the XI, YI, and getting ZI, they are all independent. So the iterations can all be performed in parallel. So the way, one way I'm going to exploit this data level parallelism is via vectors. Okay, you'll see what vectors are. Okay, so basically what we're going to do is in addition to our normal pipeline that we have, traditional, you know, integer registers, floating point registers, whatever it is that you've seen before, you're going to have a new construct, you're going to have a set of vector registers. Okay, what a vector is going to be is it's going to be a linear array of some length and then each, you know, and each element is going to be, say, a 30-qubit floating point number. Okay, so previously I had, previously I had my scalar register file. Now I'm going to start calling it a scalar register file, if you will, okay, to distinguish from vectors. See, I had eight registers, you know, R0 through R7, each one of these was, say, 32 bits over here. Okay, with vectors, a vector register is going to have some number of, say, I have 32, 32-bit elements. Okay, say, you know, like, you know, whatever, okay, you know, from 0 to 31 over here, okay. One of these is going to be one vector register, okay, and I'm going to have some number of vector registers, say I have, you know, seven vector registers. The number of elements in each vector register is also going to be called the maximum vector length. All right, so far so good? So, you know, if I have eight vector registers and I have 32 elements in each, okay, I have eight times 32, 32-bit registers, if you will. That's a lot of storage, okay. So what I'm going to do now is that, you know, I'm going to try and carry out this, the independent iterations of the loop in an overlap fashion, in a parallel fashion, okay, and I'm going to do that, okay. So what I'm going to have now is on these vector registers, I'm going to have a set of vector operations, okay. So, you know, I had scalar operations, you know, add, multiply, whatever it is, okay, load, store, okay, that all operated on, you know, one data item. I'm going to have vector analogs of those, okay, and each vector operation is going to carry out an implicit loop on so many elements, maximum vector length, okay. So basically, it's going to carry out that operation on, you know, MVL elements. In a sense, it's going to do this loop, not in software, but in hardware, all right. So I can have a load vector operation. A load vector operation is going to read so many elements from memory in consecutive memory addresses for this particular load over here. Say I have 32, maximum vector length is 32, I'm going to load 32 elements starting off from memory address, and, you know, offset of X from base address and register R1, then 32 consecutive addresses over there, I load and bring them into this vector register, okay. Here I'm loading into vector register V1 over here, okay. So basically, you know, what I have one instruction doing is doing the work of a loop that iterates 32 times, okay. And that loop, what it's doing, if I was just loading 32 elements, is calculating the address in memory, loading, incrementing, checking to see, ran to see if I'm done, if I'm done, is it 32 or less, and repeating, okay. So all that additional stuff that I'm doing in software is done in hardware. It's a very, very simple hardware controller. Just an incrementer, just an incrementer up until 32, okay. Very similarly, I can have a store instruction vector which is going to take, you know, maximum vector length elements from a vector register and then store them in memory, consecutive memory addresses starting at the base address that I calculate by adding an offset X to what's there in R1. Notice, by the way, these load and store operations over here, you know, one of them, since you are loading into a vector register, you are storing from a vector register, but I also need these scalar registers to carry out the address calculation, specification for the operation, okay. So, you know, it's not that, hey, I have this necessarily, I'm also going to need, you know, values from this integer register to carry out those operations. Okay, a vector add operation where I'm going to have two source vector registers, each has MVL elements in it, say 32, carry out the addition operation. So in this vector add operation, I'm actually carrying out 32 different add operations and storing the result into the different corresponding elements of the destination vector register, okay. Here now what I'm doing is I'm adding a scalar value to 32 different elements of the vector register, same scalar value. So the vector register, source vector register, I'm specifying in a vector register, but the scalar is a floating point value that's going to be now in one of those scalar registers. So far so good? So basically what I'm doing is here I'm taking four iterations of that loop and backing the loop body of the loop into corresponding vector instructions, okay. So here rather than loading into F1 and, you know, multiplying F0 and F1, F2, I'm loading F3, adding F2, F3, adding F4, storing F4. What I'm going to do is I'm going to load several elements into vector register V1, then I'm going to multiply the vector elements of the vector register V1 with scalar value F0, store the result in F0, load now also into vector register V3, add the elements of vector register V2 and V3, store it into V4, store the vector register 4 into maybe location there, okay. And then further now, I had four different adds and four different branches for the four different iterations dynamically. I'm going to combine and get that loop control now over here. This add is going to increment by 16 rather than 4, and this branch is in a sense still going to be the same, okay. All right. So to do this, basically, again, you know, my pipeline has to be such, I have to have those vector registers, and then I have to have some additional control. So it is saying, okay, you know, start off with element 0, increment that control next for element 1, then for element 2, et cetera. So let us see what I can get. Let me go to that Saxby code again. I, you know, we've seen this before. Five cycle multiplied, two cycle add, one cycle other operations, and I was doing 100 iterations. I, you know, draw out the timing, the pipeline for, I'm going to do this, you know, we did it a long time ago. It's taken 11 cycles per iteration. If I'm doing 100 iterations, it takes me 100 cycles. Okay. Now, let me take the vector version and say now, I didn't have 32 element vectors. I had four element vectors, okay. So there's four elements each. All right. And now, if I have that, draw the timing, pipeline diagram timing for this code, let's say, again, this load is, you know, fashion one cycle, decode into three, execute four, access the memory, five right back. As multiply comes along, it has to wait for the, you know, stall over here until the data has come back from memory, then carry out that five cycle latency. Multiply operation, write back the result, this load, I can again, you know, do that, take five cycles, access memory over here, and then for this add, add has to wait now both for the result of this as well as this result, so it can start in clock cycle 10. It takes two cycles, and then the store, wait for the write back of memory. I have to wait until, you know, the values are ready over here, and then I carry that right back over here. Okay. If I do this, then this is going to basically, you know, take 11 cycles per iteration, but now I only have one fourth of the number of iterations. Okay. So I only have 25 iterations, so I take, you know, so many cycles, that's about a factor of four. Yeah. Okay. Well, well, let us look at, we let reality hit in the next slide. Okay. So right now let's, hey, we are in academia, you know, let reality not hit right now. Okay. We'll get it. Hit next slide. Okay. Okay. So by the way, so what I'm saying over here now is, okay, that this load is going to, memory is taking only one cycle, and it's doing four, getting four items from memory. Okay. So that's basically saying I'm doing four memory operations in one cycle. That's the only way I'm going to do that load. Okay. If I have this vector length of, if I have vector size of 32, I'm doing 32 memory operations in that one cycle. Okay. That's just not working out. Okay. You know. And this multiply I'm saying over here, it's taking five cycles, is basically I'm doing four multiplies at the same time. Or if I have a 32 element vector, I'm doing 32 multiplies at the same time. Okay. That's not quite working out. So what do we do? Okay. These, you know, you can, you can have this kind of hardware. Okay. But you could also do something different. Okay. And that's something different you could do, is your units that you have, your multiply and your memory units, they are pipelined, and we only know how to make a pipeline. Okay. And further, I can, you know, I can have some, you know, pipeline floating units. I can also have multiple of those floating pipelines, pipeline execution units as well. Okay. And so the number of each type of execution unit is called, is the number of lanes that we have. Okay. So basically, you're going to stream through those vector instructions, you know, through the number of lanes, some number of data elements at a time. We see that in just a little while. And if we do that, then we are going to get this kind of a pipeline timing, and we'll come back to this after we understand how to do that. All right. Okay. So basically now what I'm saying is, hey, I'm not doing my memory access in one cycle. I'm doing four memory operations. And I'm doing only one memory operation in a cycle, so I can do these in a pipeline fashion like here. Okay. They're all still one cycle operations. They go one after the other, and now previously, instead of all being done in clock cycle four, they are going to be done until, they're going to be done in clock cycle seven. Okay. All the elements have been loaded from the memory into vector register V1. Then I can start the multiply. And now the multiply, I'm multiplying four elements one at a time. Okay. The first element is going to start in clock cycle eight. It's going to take eight, nine, 10, 11, 12. The second element, I'm going to start in clock cycle nine. It's going to take nine, 10, 11, 12, 13. Third, I'm going to start in clock cycle 10, which is going to take until 14. Fourth, I'm going to start in clock cycle 11, which is going to take until clock cycle 15. Okay. This is fine. This is fairly straightforward. No complexity over here. Then this memory operation, I can start, again, you know, this stall over here in decode, and this stall, in fact, because of the propagated stall. So I could start this load, and we start accessing the memory in clock cycle 10. It takes me 10, 11, 12, 13. And then I can carry out the distribution operation after both this and this have completed. So I can start it. This one's complete in 14. This one's complete in, sorry, this one's complete in 13. This one's complete in 15. So I can start this addition in clock cycle 16. Okay. You hear this? So now if I do that, I end up doing basically, you know, taking 20 cycles per iteration. So again, four element vectors, one lane. The load ends up being four cycles. The multipliers are being eight cycles, which is, you know, four cycles is one plus three. Eight is five plus three. Five for one and then three for the others. Okay. The addition takes, this add-f takes five cycles, and that is, you know, two plus three. And then here I can do the store, et cetera. So if you actually draw this all out, you'll end up seeing it takes 20 cycles per iteration. And I have 55 iterations. That gets 500 cycles. So I have a speed up of 2.2 over 1100. Okay. So far, so good. All right. So, again, over here that, you know, the time taken to carry out the operation in the vector is going to be the time with the scalar plus the maximum vector length divided by the number of lanes, minus one. So for, you know, memory, this was one, this was four, this was one, minus one, I was taking four cycles for the floating point. If I had to multiply over here, you know, this was five, this was four, this was one. So five plus four minus one, I end up taking eight cycles. This isn't bad, but that doesn't make us happy. And so what can we do? The vector register V1, this is V1 element zero, V1 element one, V1 element two, V1 element three. All right. And what I'm saying now is over here in this timing, this V1 element zero got ready in clock cycle five. This one was ready in clock cycle six. This one was ready in clock cycle seven. This one was ready in clock cycle eight. Sorry. Four, five, six, seven. All right. And then I didn't start this multiply. And what this multiply was doing is it was multiplying this with F0 and writing the result into vector register V2. This was V2 element zero, V2 element one, V2 element three, V2 element four. Okay? So what I'm saying in this timing over here is I have to wait for the entire vector register to be written before I'm starting this multiply operation over here. But element zero is ready in clock cycle four. Why can't I start the multiplication of V1 zero and F0 and write into V2 zero in clock cycle five? Okay? So in a sense, bypassing, right? That's what we did is bypassing. Here what we are doing is we are doing a vector bypass. And this vector bypass, it gets a special term. It's called changing, vector changing. Okay? So you see what we are going to try and do? Okay? We are not going to wait for the, and especially if this is 32 over here, you know? I don't have to wait. This element is ready here. I don't have to wait 32 cycles to actually access it and carry out the operation. So that then leads to this bypassed version. Okay? Well, what we can do now is for the zeroth element, I can bypass that zeroth element and start the multiplication for the zeroth element in clock cycle five rather than previously I was waiting until clock cycle eight. All right? And then in clock cycle five, when this is ready, I can start element one in clock cycle two. In cycle six, three is ready, so I can start three in clock cycle seven, the multiplication, et cetera, et cetera. Okay? So what I'm doing is now I am bypassing with elements of each vector, bypassing the values from elements of each vector register to the needed computation to carry out the corresponding element of the computation and write the corresponding element in the resulting vector range. Are you with me on this? So that is what is called vector chaining. So, you know, while all the results are complete after this much time, the first results, okay, like vector S to V zero and V one, you know, you know, already if I have, you know, two legs already after this much time, I can start the dependent vector operation as soon as those are ready. Okay? So over here now, if I do a, you know, calculate, you know, how many cycles is it taking now with this bypassing or chaining, vector chaining, it ends up taking 11 cycles per iteration and if I have 25 iterations, I get to do a 35 cycles, I get back that time to us before. Okay? So with vector chaining, what's happening is the following. Okay? So one vector operation, the latency of one vector operation, okay, the latency of one vector operation begins. Okay? The latency of each vector operation begins. The latency of each vector operation still is the scalar latency plus the maximum vector length by the number of lanes minus one. So again, for memory, it was one plus four minus one. Okay? For multiplication, the latency was five plus four minus one eight. Okay? Now, if I want to do one and two together, you know, when I was doing, if I'm doing one and two together rather than add these two latencies, which is what would be the case with our bypassing, what effectively I'm able to do is the time to do this is going to be the time for scalar operation one, time for scalar operation two, plus the maximum vector length divided by the number of lanes minus one. So one cycle memory, five cycle multiplication, four element vector length, one lane. So it was one plus five plus four minus one. That's nine cycles. Okay? So the time taken to carry out is, you know, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine cycles to carry out these operations in a chain fashion. Not 13 cycles, which is, you know, five plus eight, or four plus eight, 12 cycles, yeah? Questions about this? So this, of course, is very widely used, okay? But, you know, the thing that you have to be careful of is the following, okay? You know, what did we do in that bypass? What did we do in that bypass in a simple amount of pipeline? Okay, you bypass from the output of the EX stage of the mem stage back to the input, okay? And if the dependent instruction wasn't in the EX stage at that time, you could not get the value of that bypass. Okay? So this multiply better be issued and be ready to pick the values of the bypass at precisely the correct time, otherwise the bypass doesn't work, okay? And so, you know, if you issue this, like, one cycle later, okay, one cycle later, so when you are looking for element zero, it's actually element one that's coming out on the bus and being written to the vector register. It's not going to work, because you're going to have to go back and read that then from vector register, zero to element of vector register. So, you know, doing the hardware to get that done takes a little effort, but, you know, it can be done. Initially, when, you know, it was quite a big deal, you know, when Gray first did it. Okay. So where is the benefit coming from for vector instructions? All right. First, there are many, many fewer loop control instructions, okay, many fewer, you know, add medians and branch, et cetera. And the vector instructions, they basically have this hardware counter doing all that controlling for them. There's no software. So, you know, there isn't that software. Those instructions aren't fetched, they aren't processed, et cetera. Okay. Further, these read-after-write stalls, again, you know, within the instructions on one iteration, only happen in the first iteration. After that, the vector pipelining basically overlaps the different iterations and hides the stalls of the subsequent iterations. Okay, so over here, you know, the first element is stalling. The element for the first iteration is stalling, seeing that stall, okay? But the other elements of the second, third, fourth iteration, they are not seeing that stall because that stall is completely overlapped with that stall from previous iterations. Okay. Now, you know, a little further ahead, what we will see is we talk about, you know, energy complications, and that's one of the reasons people, you know, are trying to also, you know, work with vectors or something. Say I'm doing, you know, say I'm doing, this is scalar, this is vector, okay? And now, you all know, you have a piece of code, you have the fetch and decode and yada, yada, yada, et cetera like this, okay? So in this vector code, I'm fetching one, two, three, four, five, six, seven instructions, okay? Here, I will be fetching seven times four. So many cache accesses, okay? So many decodes, et cetera, et cetera. You know, there are machines that, for this kind of code, actually have something called loop buffers where if the loop fits, you know, in the entire iteration fits in the loop buffer, you don't have to repeatedly go to the instruction cache. You just can get it out of the loop buffer. You know, even the early, you know, this is known for many, many years. But you're doing a lot more instruction catches in these scalar code that you aren't doing in this vector code. So in a sense, you know, that's a lot of that. The performance is coming there in multiple ways. How does the performance change with vector length? Okay? How big of a vector do I want? Okay? So, you know, this is the time that it takes to execute the code in vector mode as a scalar plus maximum vector length by L minus one. If my vector length is one, then basically it's the same as doing things in a scalar vector mode, okay? If this vector length says 1,000, okay? Then basically, you know, I'm in a sense doing one element per cycle. I'm doing 1,000 plus scalar, you know, scalar is the time that it takes to carry out that operation, okay? So what that argument is for is, hey, to amortize this latency or start up the scalar latency, I need to have long vectors, okay? And in fact, when we talk a little bit about these horrible machines, these are the first vector machines that were created worldwide in the CDC again, and they did not have vector registers. They were getting our vector operations on memory, okay? And the memory latencies are long, and so they had large vectors. And then Seymour Cray then went off and did his creative machines with the vector registers. When you have, if you now have vector registers, because my vectors are all in memory and I'm fetching them from memory, okay? I'm not having any storage in the register. If I have vector registers, then I need to have storage for all the vector registers, and that size can be done, okay? So say I had, you know, 16 vector registers. If I had 16 vector registers and each vector register had 32 elements, and each element was four bytes, that is 62, what did I just say, 32 times 32 times 8 bytes of storage as opposed to a scalar register file 32 times 8, 32 times 4 bytes, okay? So much, much, much larger, okay? So, you know, again, in this simple path fashion, again, this vector extra file is 32 times larger than this one. So that limits the, not only the size of each vector, but also how many vector registers you can have. Now, again, you know, the thing with vectors is that's where Amdahl's Law also comes in. And in fact, Amdahl's Law, you know, Gene Amdahl first proposed it, where the, you know, at the time this was proposed, the machine that was being proposed at that time as the future of whatever is in computing was a machine being built at Illinois called the ILLIAC, okay? And the ILLIAC was a, you know, a SIMD machine that it had at that time, I think 64 processors doing, you know, operations in parallel. And everyone was saying, hey, that's the future, not these silly IBM machines that, you know, IBM is making in some sense. And that's when he came up with this very simple Amdahl's Law calculation to say, hey, you know, if, you know, 90% of your code, say, is, you know, vectorized and you get a speed of 10, you know, you're still only going to get a speed of, you know, 5.3 or more if you will. And so people then would forget that, hey, spent a lot of effort on the 90%, but don't forget the 10%. And Cray did not forget the 10%, okay? He understood Amdahl's Law very well. That's why he did, his, the CDC machine, it did not worry about the scalar part of it. And it had that faster scalar unit and that's why it was much better. Questions so far? Yeah. In regards to the vector line fitting in, Intel actually had a problem with that recently. They had to completely drop their newest vector extension because five, or 16, 512 bit registers were just too much for the efficiency cores. So they, for like one of, like one of the few times actually dropped an extension because they just, it wouldn't work for the efficiency cores. Let me, let me bring that up in a few minutes. We'll bring that, we'll get to that point in a little bit, okay? I think that's an important thing is, we'll get to that. All right. So now I have this, you know, vector machine. And say I have, you know, you know, I have vector registers of a certain length. And so say I have a vector, you know, say I have vector registers where, you know, I have 30 developments in there, so the maximum vector length is 30. Okay, and you want to use a vector machine. And I say, okay, you can only use this machine and all your loops iterate a multiple of 32. You want to say go away. I want my loop to iterate 100 times. That's not a multiple of 32. What are you going to do? Okay, and that's what then brings up this notion of a vector length register. Okay, a vector length register is between zero and the maximum vector length and say, hey, you know, why I can carry out the operations on MVF elements. At this time I'm carrying out the length on, actually at all times I'm carrying out the vector operation on the number of elements that is, you know, on VL half. The contents of this vector length register that many elements. All right. So basically what you're doing is you're taking a loop that iterates a large number of times and you're chopping up that loop into multiple chunks that are of the size of the maximum vector length and then whatever's left over. Okay, so say I had a maximum vector length of 32 and I wanted to carry out 100 iterations. What I will do is I will say, hey, you know, set the vector length register to 100 to modulo 32. Okay, and then, you know, that's my, you know, leftover orphan, okay, and then, you know, carry out those, you know, carry out the iterations plus 32, four left over first, then 32, 32, 32. Okay, and that's all, you know, that process in a sense is also called strip mining, but all these vector operations that we're talking about, all these vector operations that we talked about over here, all these vector operations, okay, while how many elements they operate upon is determined by the vector length register, all right, which can be up to so many. Are you with me on this? Okay, so the vector length register, okay. All right, so now all is good, except if you have branches. If you have a branch inside a loop, don't use my vector machine. Well, but I like your money, so let me figure out how I can get your money, okay, and, you know, so what you can further do, remember predicated execution? Okay, what did predicated execution do? Say, hey, you know, I'm going to, based on the branch, I'm going to compute some predicate, and then every operation is going to be, use that predicate, I'm going to do the operation, okay. If the predicate is true, the operation gets done and writes the result. If the predicate is false, it becomes a no-one. Very similarly for vector, what I'm going to do is, I'm going to have a vector mask register, okay. A vector mask register, if I have 32 element vectors, this could be a register of 32 bits, okay. If a bit is zero, then if a bit is one in the vector mask register, then the corresponding element, the vector operation gets done. I do the vector operation, but, you know, for that corresponding, I write it to the resulting destination register. If the bit is zero, then I do not write the result. Or if there's an exception, I do not recognize the exception, et cetera. We still end up loading. We still end up going through everything, right? Hold on to that question. Let me explain this first, and then we'll get to that question, okay. So say I have this piece of code, which is, you know, if xi not equal to zero, zi gets a divided by xi, okay. So basically, I don't want to do this division by zero. This is my, it's correct code, it's check and you see. I don't want to do a divide by zero, I don't want to do a divide by zero, okay. So I can have, I can vectorize this piece of code by, look, okay, you know, load those 32 elements into V1, and then carry out my, a vector set operation. Remember our scalar set instructions that was going to set a destination register to zero or one based on a comparison, okay. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to compare the element, vector after V1 element by element, compared to F0. And if they are, if, you know, that element is zero, it's the same as F0, which is zero, then that corresponding bit is going to be set to one, say, okay. I actually, I'm flipping, it's going to be set to zero, okay. Set not equal, okay. Then I'm going to divide, divide, carry out this division, okay, under this control of this mask so that for the elements that this, you know, the bit is set to one, for which the bit is set to zero, I do not actually write the value or even recognize the exception, okay. And then I store the entire vector back into Z over here, and then I clear my map. Now, getting to what you just said, this load operation, I am doing it under the control of the vector mask. It's actually zero, I do the operation, one, I do it. And so here, the vector mask is cleared. So I load all those values, okay. Then I set that vector mask, okay. Then divide based on this vector mask, under the control of this vector mask. And then also store only those elements for which the vector mask bit is correct. Now, if I, you know, if I set a vector mask over here to something and I did this load, then I would also do that load under that vector mask. Are you with me on this? This is, again, you know, very widely used because now, you know, when we have control like this, we can actually vectorize pieces of code like this, but you could not otherwise. Now, here's something else that is, you know, say I want to carry out this piece of code. I'm basically summing all the elements of a vector. And so, you know, the way I've written this code is, you know, s is, gets, it's like zero. It's s plus element xi. And so now you see the iterations, the different iterations are not independent of the arrow dependent, okay? And so that says I can't use, you know, vectors. But what I could do is the following, okay? 100 elements. First what I could do is I could add these elements like here, all right? So go from 50, go from 100 to a vector of 50. And this I can do as a vector. So now basically what I'm doing is I'm having two vectors, 50 each, okay? And, you know, adding the elements of those, and those I can do in better, in better fashion. Then from 50, I can go down to 25, and also as a vector, okay? Now from 25, I can go down to whatever it is, you know, 30 or whatever it is, you know? If it makes sense for me to do it faster with a vector, okay? Eventually I get down to some size where, you know, doing it as a vector isn't beneficial, so then I end up doing it in scalars. This is an idiom that, again, I think it's fairly, you know, well used to try and take, you know, code that you're doing and convert it somehow into a vectorizable. Yeah, I have an equation like this. We're now using resolved computing. The equations aren't necessarily independent. There are still vector construction constructs that can help in cases like this that are quite specialized. I won't go into that over there. Okay, so again, basically what happens is, you know, you come up with the basic ideas of vector machine, all right? And then, you know, you use it, but then there are all these different code types, et cetera, et cetera, and then, you know, and then you try and see what more you can add on a little bit to get those types. So, okay, stepping back, you know, the fundamental conflict in the ILP was, you know, higher clock frequency or high IPC, typically not both. If you had high clock frequency, deeper pipeline, more hazards, low IPC, high IPC, and superscalar complex, issue bypass, low clock. TLP, five steps this, because the operations within the vector are parallel, so they're not in a hazard, this loop control, and this is the key, you know. As I said, there are loop control hazards, you know, high frequency, deep pipeline with no hazards, and you have high IPC, and you have the high IPC, and you get the natural wipe. So, you know, I mean, if you take a look at it a different way, you know, if you take a look at it, what I am doing in this one decode and dispatch, if you will, if I had a four-element vector, I'm actually doing a 32, about four-element wide instruction. If I have a 32-element vector, it's as if I'm doing a 32 operation wide instruction, okay? So that allows me to, you know, get the high IPC without necessarily impacting the... So, you know, things started out, you know, with these memory-to-memory vector registers that I was talking about, Texas Instruments, CDC, and they were optimized for long vectors that required all vectors assigned in memory, and that required a lot of memory bandwidth. And they also had this long startup latency. This memory bandwidth thing is maybe a little bit of a red herring because, you know, I can reduce memory bandwidth with these vector architecture architectures only if I'm actually reusing data that has been loaded. Okay? Well, sometimes you can, but, you know, most often you necessarily can't do that. These, you know, the vector architectures, you know, crane, convex, they are optimized for short 8262-element vectors. Okay. So, you know, vectors great. Vectors great, okay? And, but many applications don't map onto vectors, and then further, actually, trying to compile for a vector machine gets to be quite hard. So, you know, you have to carry out the analysis, analyze all the, you know, loads and store operations, do the address, check to see what the addresses might be, doing all that. Just like that happened that we talked about in the, you know, IS64 kind of, you know, BIW scheduling, all of that you have to do in some sense. Okay. And because all of that is next to impossible to do when you have your genetic, you know, code that, you know, may learn or whatever it is, you know, that kind of code, okay, it doesn't quite work out. Vectors did not get used for your general purpose computing. General purpose computing, they're very good at scientific computing, okay? So, you know, I mean, so, you know, Cray, you know, built these machines that were very big and, you know, they were sold by putting them in a truck and leaving them in a parking lot in Maryland and money showed up in the bank. Someone broke that truck away and took it to some place that didn't exist. You know, at that time, NSA did not exist. No such agency. No such agency, you know. So it wasn't public, all right, and they bought a lot of machines. And in fact, you know, in fact, the Cray machines, they actually had instruction, which they also do called a population count instruction. What a population count is, count the number of ones in, you know, 64 bits or whatever it is, which they did specifically for the NSA because for the NSA wanted it, they wanted it to, you know, that was important for their code, you know. Okay, so then, you know, so, you know, I mean the, you know, you can have floating point, you know, scientific floating point, people all said, integers, okay. But then, you know, what happened, you know, what was big was the general focus, you know, process of things that Intel was making, you know. Intel got to be where it did because it won the, you know, IBM, you know. Apple came out with the, what was the first computer? I thought Mac was in the way there, okay. And IBM was big, okay. And so IBM, no, nobody's going to buy this computer. I mean, people buy it, but they don't have money. The money's at the banks. The banks don't buy stuff for tens of millions of dollars. Who cares if, you know, we don't want the $3,000 apiece machine. But then they saw this coming and had to react, you know. We had the big computer company. No one else is, whatever it is. So they came out with the IBM PC, but they didn't want to build their own processes for it, okay. They didn't want to build the own process for it because, you know, whatever, you know, the government could go after them, et cetera, et cetera. So they went to whoever had the best processor at that time, and that was Motorola. And IBM was very big on, hey, you know, that whole IBM management philosophies. You cannot rely only on one supplier. You have to have an alternate supplier, okay. So Motorola, is there an alternate supplier for your chips? Because I think you had to get a little competition to get a good price, too. They said, no. You can get it from us. They went to Intel. Intel said, well, we'll let AMD be the alternate supplier, okay. And so they gave AMD the license to all their stuff, and AMD was the second source for IBM, okay. And then for years, for years, Intel had to keep AMD alive or barely alive so they couldn't compete to keep that agreement for that second source alive, okay. Things change, all right. So, but then, you know, what was happening is that what started happening was people started coming up with other applications for your PCs, right. And there was a company called Real Networks, Real Networks that, you know, came up with a sort of a media player. So audio, where you could listen to radio, progressive radio on the internet, if you will. That's a side story, by the way. One of the people that, I mean, the Real Networks, who was one of the founders of the RCA department or what, Phil, I forget his last name, but one of the other people who was working there was, she's a senator now, Maria Cantwell. And there's an old story about exercising stop options and ordinary minimum banks, et cetera, and that's not relevant to this class. So these are things you end up having to deal with in video mode and so on. So, you know, for streaming audio, you know, listening to radio on your computer, and then, you know, there was, okay, you know, you can do images over there. That then led to the rise of these integer vectors where, you know, your images are this RGBA, you know, pixels, speech recognition, geometry, audio, whatever it is, okay. And what that then led to is this whole notion of multimedia extensions, all right? So you're designing a machine for so-called real application, which has your 32-bit or your 64-bit integer. Yeah, 32-bit, you know, 64-bit floating point. That's what you do, okay? But now, if you are working on pixels, okay, those aren't taken 64-bits, but your AMUs have been built for 64-bits, your integer AMUs have 64-bits. So if I want to carry out an operation on one byte, you know, of an audio stream, then seven of those eight bytes in that arithmetic operation I'm doing every time are zero, okay? Instead, I can now basically take my 64-bit ALU, also have it operate as eight 8-bit ALUs, and then feed it with data that is eight of these, you know, eight-bit streams from audio, or, you know, black and white pixel, or, you know, if I add color, then I feed multiple of those pixels. I can add, you know, four, two of these 32-bit pixels, four-byte pixels. Okay? So that led to this first set of techniques for, again, single instruction, multiple data. Okay? So when you are doing this single operation, you are doing it on multiple subwords, very similar to your normal vector operations, okay? But doing much more now at a word at a time. Okay? And then, of course, you know, like when you do these, you know, operations on, you know, sub, you know, on subwords, then it's like those parallel operations. You don't have getties propagate from one part to the other. You have, you know, saturating, et cetera, things like that. So after, you know, this came about, the Intel multimedia extensions, MMX extensions, then people started making them. So the Intel MMX had 64-bit integers where they could carry it out as multiple operations as either two 32-bit or four 16-bit or eight 8-bit operations. Then you have more instructions to support that. Okay? Then, once you do that, you have more and more of that. Okay? So, you know, SSC had 64-bit floating point, then SSC 2, and then, you know, once one company does it, every one other company does it. Okay? I can even keep track. I think one of those slides we'll go take a look at again, you know, has, you know, there are different types of things that you can do. So I'll get to your question in a minute, okay? You know? And so, again, you know, these array processors are also very similar, you know, single instruction, multiple data. You know, people try, and in GPUs, basically, in a sense, you know, started off as some kind of array processing. Okay. The problem with using any of these SIMB-type instructions and operations is that how do you actually create the code that uses this? How do you actually take your high-level code and translate it into vector operations? All right? And so there has been a whole body of work of trying to auto-take, you know, have compilers do that automatic vectorization. And it becomes quite hard, you know? And, you know, languages like Fortran, you know, is like, which, these things are easy to do, but, you know, people start writing in different languages. You know? If they only did one thing, life would be good, but they don't. You know? So, and many a times, it's just very simply, sometimes you have compiler directors say, ah, you know, I've looked at this code, just write a vector instruction. But typically what happens is that this MMX and SAC code and all this is not generated by them. It's typically written by some, in libraries, by someone who knows how to use it, and then you use the library with that extension. Now, you know, getting back to I think the point, what you're basically saying is, hey, you know, they had all these, they kept having more and more and more, and they couldn't use it. Okay? So, yes, even these MMX things and so on like that are for one, they work great. But any vector operation works great, when you can use it. Okay? If you can't use it, then it's hardware that you have to have, and there's a lot of it. So now, if you're actually trying to just, you know, do a word, you know, something for a lower end, if you will, do you want to have all this hardware that is rarely ever used? Okay, so that is, you know, some of the issues that people, can we have you just see, and I'll go back. I was actually going to add a side comment that all the companies, it had store companies, so all the companies that put in these sort of very simple DSP, fixed-life, SIM vectors are now turning them into Cray-style vectors, because a lot of this data processing stuff is namely popular, like ARM is supplanting NEON with the new instructions, and Intel, Okay, okay, okay, okay. Yes, okay, thank you. We'll talk a little bit about that. Okay, so here it is now, you know, the Qualcomm ARM, where they have vector execution blinds, or, you know, the NEON-style SIMD, or whatever it is, and then more for floating, it's more, you know, vector-like operations. And so, what happened recently is, again, life is good, making a lot of money, and then this, you know, grad students write something called AlexNet, and everybody goes GPU, GPU, GPU, GPU, GPU, okay, and then, you know, people building hardware, the first question the execs get asked, the execs typically don't know much, but they know buzzwords, is where's your AI hardware? What are you doing to compete against NVIDIA? What is your solution for AI? Okay, I mean, that's what, if you saw what's happening with Intel, that's exactly, you know, those guys, they have an AI technique, that, you're out, whatever, okay, and so, they are all now, then, trying to put in hardware to say, yeah, we have AI hardware, and, you know, so, you know, the pre-styled traditional vector machines and the GPUs are a lot more alike. It'll actually be interesting to see as the model. So, you know, one of the other things that's happening is this is sort of a... I have a few more slides on this one, but we can get back to this in a minute. Is, so, you know, NVIDIA, you know, building all these GPUs, I'm doing 64-bit floating point arithmetic, everything, doing a lot of computation, and the national labs, you know, building these huge machines. I'm going to build them with NVIDIA GPUs, you know, and I have 64-bit floating point, and, you know, my fire simulations, and I'm doing with my 64-bit floating point with the right underflow and whatever it is, deal with, I have my codes, okay, and now there's this AI thingy, and the AI thingy just says, more, more, more, more, more, more, more, more, more, more, and I don't need 64-bit floating point. I don't even need 32-bit floating point. Maybe 16-bit, but 8-bit floating point. You know, I can do eight times more with the same hardware that you use 64-bit floating point, and, yeah, if I want to make money, and my market is there versus, you know, here I have people spending hundreds of billions of dollars, I may lose that 64-bit floating point and go with the 8-bit. These guys are getting all very nervous. How are we going to carry out a scientific analysis? Maybe pay a few hundred billion dollars and then you can do that. I don't know. So, anyway. So, these are things that happen. So, these are things that happen.
