Title: 752_Lec22_b
Source file: 752_Lec22_b.mp3
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

the same time and we'll see what we mean by the same time on the hardware. What multi-threading does is in a sense it trades off the latency of a single thread for more improved throughput. And because sharing the processor hardware potentially degrades the latency of individual threads, it's not potentially, it always does, it depends on how much. If you are running more threads, or you have to run in your workload, you're going to improve the aggregate latency of executing the multiple threads, and that's in our example too, and it's going to improve the utilization. So, you know, if I had a thread A with an individual latency of 10 seconds and it ran by itself alone on the hardware, but if it ran alongside thread B, it took 15 seconds. Thread B, the individual latency, would be 20 seconds by itself, but if it ran alongside with thread A, it took 25 seconds. Now, if you were to execute both threads sequentially, then it would take 10 plus 20, 30 seconds, but in parallel, if you're executing both of them simultaneously, it will take 25 seconds. So, while the multi-threading is slowing down each thread by 5 seconds, from 10 to 15, 20, 25, overall latency is getting improved. Okay? That is the rationale. And, you know, again, further the rationale is, when you have different workloads that you are running, you just don't, you know, you don't typically design a machine to allow only one workload. That's not the case. When you have multiple workloads you're running, then, you know, some workloads have, different workloads have different types of parallelism. If I have running a floating point workload, maybe I can keep the machine busy with just that one thread, my small matrix, small flyer, whatever. Okay? But if I'm running more than one workload, and if I have, you know, a server situation that I have lots of threads, then multi-threading through the rescue. Okay. What happens if you put them the wrong way? Oh, well. So, we're going to talk about now, basically, how are we going to share hardware, the process of hardware, amongst different threads. Okay? What does it take, and, you know, what needs to be shared and not shared, et cetera. Okay? So we talk about different implementations of multi-threading. Okay? But regardless of the different implementations, they have several similarities, basically, in how the different threads share the different hardware structures. Okay? And when you are running, when you are running a thread on a piece of hardware, what is important? The important is the sequential state, the sequential hardware, where the state of the thread is maintained. You know, registers, you know, memory, et cetera. Okay? ALU, which is, you know, combinational logic, doesn't matter. If you're giving inputs and producing outputs, it doesn't remember anything. Okay? So any piece of hardware which does not maintain any state, such as the ALUs, those are going to be dynamically shared. Okay? Floating point units, et cetera. Okay? Those are purely combinational logic. Those are going to be shared amongst the different threads somehow. We'll see how. Okay? Which is persistent hard state, which is the context of the thread. Okay? Which are all the register values, program counter, et cetera. Each thread needs its own program counter. Each thread needs its own set of registers. Okay? That is the context of the thread that you're going to replicate, so each thread has its own. You're not going to share that. Okay? And we'll see, you know, examples as we go along. Okay? There is also sequential logic which maintains persistent state, but it's really, you know, not in a sense part of the context of the thread. You know, caches are just a replica of the memory locations. Okay? So I can share the caches amongst different threads, just like I'm sharing them between different, you know, processes in a multi-programmed uniprocessor. Okay? So, you know, very similarly, a branch predictor. You know, what is a branch predictor for? You know, a branch predictor is learning, you know, from history of branches for one thread to give the prediction about a branch. But after all, it's essentially a little coin toss. Very, very biased coin toss. Okay? But, you know, whether you give the prediction for branch A or branch B or branch C in thread one or branch D in thread two, it isn't that important. Okay? There is no correctness issue involved with that. Okay? So the soft state typically ends up being dynamically partitioned just like it would be on a multi-programmed uniprocessor based on how the threads run. Okay? However, you know, when we talk about TLBs, okay, we talked about, you know, accessing the TLB with a, you know, virtual address, if you were, to get a physical address over there. Okay? Now what we need to do is if we allow sharing in the TLB entries to be shared amongst different threads or different processes, then you're going to have to give an indication for which virtual, for which process they're given virtual addresses. Okay? So typically what you'd have to do is along with the virtual address, you'd also need the address space identifiers or process IDs that will allow then multiple different processes of threads to share entries of a TLB. Okay? Are you with me on this? Yeah? I didn't answer my question. Sorry. Yeah. Now caches typically are, you know, copies, replicas of memory, of your main memory. And we saw how you're going to access the caches maybe with a virtually indexed physically tagged cache, but the virtual index was, in a sense, effectively it was a physically indexed, physically tagged cache because the part of the address that you're using to access the cache, indexing the cache, is the same between the virtual and physical addresses. All right? So you don't need any address space IDs for, you know, things for the caches. Now you could say, hey, maybe I have address space IDs along with the branch predictor so I can distinguish branch predictor entries for the different threads. And you could do that. Okay? But it sort of really doesn't matter in some sense. All right? Your branch predictor is like, you know, doing something this way, that way, and gives you zero or one. What you do want to do is remember a return address tag. Okay? A return address tag you better keep for that particular thread. Otherwise it's going to get corrupted. Not going to work very well. All right? So, you know, you keep, and very similarly, the branch history register, this is actually a small, you know, it's almost nothing, a branch history register, you know, 10, 12, 14 bits per thread. Okay? So you typically would replicate those, but not this other soft state. These are, again, not part of the architecture, the context of the thread. So you don't actually need to replicate them, but, you know, a return address tag, you know, if you do not replicate it, it really is not going to work. It's in the stack frame, right? No. No, the return address tag is not in the stack frame. Okay? The information in the return address tag is in the stack frame. But the way we are using the return address tag is dynamically to remember the calls and returns to predict the target address of a return. Yes, the target address of the return is there on the stack frame, but we want to fetch the instruction. But, I mean, in this case, couldn't we just say, okay, we swapped out, and, like, the return address tag may not be right, or we just can't use it? You can do that. You can do that. I guess because these are threads, they're context switching, like, super fast, aren't they? We'll see. We'll see how fast they are context switching. Okay? And, you know, we talk about different schemes that we're not referring. You know, one scheme, they may switch every tens of cycles. Okay? In another scheme, they switch every cycle. In a third scheme, they are resident simultaneously. They are switching zero cycles. Okay? So if you have two threads running simultaneously, you replicate the return address tag. When we put multiple threads in our own program thread, then how would we effectively communicate the same information between the same threads if we are replicating the entire register thread? When you write a different... If you write a multi-threaded program, the different threads aren't sharing registers. They share memory. Yeah, they communicate from memory, but we'll see when we talk about multi-processors. You know, the shared memory model, they're going to be communicating from memory by doing loads and stores on memory, and that is going to result in cache coherence problems, et cetera, and we'll see that in the next year. But then the register threads are in a way very powerful and very large, and so we are talking, like... Hold on to that. Hold on to that question. We haven't gotten there yet. So, you know, we want to maybe replicate the state, and this return address tag isn't that big a deal. You know, four entries, eight entries, nothing much over there compared to this. And then there is all the transient state, like the pipeline latches, the yard buffer, reservation stations, and they get partitioned amongst the different threads somehow, and we'll see what that somehow means. So what are the main differences? The main difference is really, main question is what is the thread scheduling policy? When to switch from one thread to another? And related to that really is how do the threads actually share the pipeline? Okay? And, you know, what we decide over here depends upon what kind of latencies you want to tolerate, how much is the latency, and how much single thread performance are you willing to sacrifice. Okay? And if these are not obvious, and they are likely not, we will see in the next few slides what we mean by that, clarify that. Okay? And there are three designs we're going to talk about. Coarse-grade multi-threading, fine-grade multi-threading, and simultaneous multi-threading. So, pictorially, this is sort of what they look like. Here I have a machine that is doing four instructions per cycle. Okay? And, you know, I have a red thread, a blue thread, a green thread, and a yellow thread. Okay? And, you know, in fine-grade, in coarse-grade multi-threading, basically the hardware is going to be used by one thread at a time. So the red thread followed by a blue thread. So here the red thread is using all four slots. Here it's only using three, and there's one idle. Here, because of the ILP in the thread, you know, you're only using one slot, and three are idle, et cetera. Okay? And the white are the idle. In fine-grade multi-threading, what you're doing is you're basically, you know, switching between the different threads every cycle. So first cycle, the red thread uses all four slots. Second cycle, the blue uses three and one idle. Third cycle, the green's using all slots. Fourth cycle, the yellow's using two and two are idle, et cetera. Okay? And in simultaneous multi-threading, or hyper-threading, as it is known, is in each cycle, what you have is the different slots are being used by different threads at the same time. So here, two of these slots are from the red thread, one from the red thread, one from the blue thread, one from the green thread. In this cycle, two slots are being used by blue thread, one by red, and one is idle, for example. Okay? And the whole point of multi-threading is going to be to try and reduce the number of white slots, if you will. Okay? So let's go through these one by one. Let's talk about coarse-grained multi-threading. The rationale for coarse-grained multi-threading is, look, my performance of a single thread is paramount, so I'm going to keep doing that thread until I get to a point where it may make sense for me to do something else. Okay? So we all know that, hey, if I'm executing a program and I have a page fault, it's going to take me a million clock cycles. Rather than sitting idle for a million clock cycles, I might as well swap this program out and let some other program run and come back when the data comes back from memory. Okay? Now, take that down a little bit. If I have a cache miss and I go to memory, and it's taking a hundred clock cycles, you know, now what we have seen so far is, okay, I have a miss that takes a hundred clock cycles, but maybe I can go and get to a, with my ILB branch prediction, fetch this, execute that. I can issue another load instruction that may hit, may miss, and now I have two misses going on simultaneously. Or we saw, you know, the non-bonding caches I had like in approximately eight misses going on simultaneously, or misses coming from, you know, that same thread if you would. Okay? But the memory latency keeps getting bigger and bigger in some sense. Okay? So, you know, maybe rather than trying to find things to do with these white slots from the same thread, maybe what I can do is I can stop doing this red thread, okay, when I see that long cache miss, and then it takes me some time to switch over to the next thread, then execute this blue thread, and when that memory operation comes back, for example, then I start executing the red thread again. All right? So, you know, I want to sacrifice very little single thread latency, okay? And I'm basically going to switch to another thread when I have a long latency operation for this single thread. All right? So, basically, you have a preferred thread that you don't want to sacrifice the latency for. You switch to thread B on an L2 miss, for example, switch back to A when the L2 miss returns. And so the latency of A hasn't really been sacrificed except for, you know, how long there is a take to switch between the threads. All right? So, that's the thread scheduling policy. The pipeline partitioning policy, how does the thread actually share the pipeline? Okay? Really, you aren't sharing the pipeline because at any, you know, you're having the red thread, then you switch over to the blue thread, and then you switch back to the red thread. Okay? So in a sense, only one thread is executing at one time. And so what you do over here is, you know, you wait for the pipeline to flush, and the pipeline flush is sort of the latency overhead you have. So, you know, if you have latencies that are shorter than twice the pipeline depth, you know, it takes one pipeline depth to basically flush the pipeline and another to restart it, then if you have latency that are smaller than that, then really this doesn't work very well. So you have machines that are designed for, you know, just as you use for, you know, short hit-over pipelines, because they don't have big depths, and there's reasonably latency. So if you have, you know, reasonably small latencies, you can tolerate it. Okay. So an exemplar, a commercial exemplar of this, which actually not many people know about, was the IBM North Star Pulsar machines, okay? So these are machines that are built out of... Anybody ever heard of Rochester, Minnesota? Mayo Clinic, it's a big thing over there. And the other, even bigger thing for a long time was IBM Rochester. IBM Rochester, the one unit over there, well, you know, generated I think 40% of IBM's revenues, okay? And, you know, why did they go to multi-threading, whereas the East Coast people that were selling the big servers of CSMT CDs not feel multi-threading necessarily, you know, was that important, okay? So what the East Coast IBM people, they were selling to financial institutions that were using for, you know, whatever, payroll, whatever it is, you know, databases, et cetera. That's what you wanted to improve the performance of. Okay, you didn't have hundreds or thousands of threads run, okay? Who do you think the biggest customer of IBM Rochester was? When I found out, it blew my mind. I don't think any of you have a guess, but take a guess anyway. Huh? Army? See that? Army uses. Army? No. Army has money. Casinos have a lot more. It was casinos, okay? It was casinos. They had all these transactions going on over there as multiple threads, okay? And, you know, and so, yeah, each one of those transactions, okay, missing in the cash, whatever, switch to another thread, keep those multiple threads, people addition out their money to you, go. Okay? So, you know, this was, in a sense, a successful, a early successful commercial use of multi-threading. And so what you do in coarse-grained multi-threading is basically, here's your pipeline for one thread, okay, running one program. So now each thread gets its own program counter. Each thread gets its own register file, okay? The instruction cache and the branch predictor, somehow they get shared based on each thread's need or demand for those. Okay? And the data cache gets shared, but in a sense, you know, when you have a L2 miss, you switch over to the next other thread, and then when the L2 miss gets serviced, you switch back to this simply by flipping the program counter, okay? The next multi-threading technique, and by the way, by the way, okay, okay, so the one this way is, you know, one of the early techniques, early commercial applications of multi-threading. Then what happened then, again, in the early 2000s, okay? That's when companies like Facebook came up, all right? And they had huge data structures, graphs, you go from here to your friend there and load something there, you know, pointers, all of that. Very big data structures that are all, you know, linked in some kind. No arrays, none of your fancy matrix multiplication, you know, chasing pointers all over the place. Cache misses, okay, and multiple things happening at the same time. So the push for multi-threading then sort of came up, again, for, you know, when applications like Facebook came up. All right, another multi-threading technique that has been around for a very long time is basically fine-grained multi-threading, which is effectively switching every clock cycle. So what you do in fine-grained multi-threading is, you know, you sacrifice single-thread performance because what's happening? You can just take a look at this, okay? The red thread, if there are n threads, okay, then the red thread gets a turn to execute after n cycles, okay? So it's basically, you know, the latency of execution for each thread is increased significantly. However, okay, so the thread switching policy is you switch threads every cycle. Whether you have even an L1 hit doesn't matter, okay? You're switching a thread every cycle. And the pipeline gets partitioned dynamically. Basically, every stage of the pipeline is a different thread, okay? And, you know, so that allows you to tolerate all the latencies, whether the latency is one cycle, two cycles, whatever it is, it doesn't matter. Rather than finding some other instruction from my, if I have a three-cycle latency, load-use latency, rather than finding three instructions from my own thread, I'm finding them from some other thread, if you will. So the, you know, length of the pipeline really doesn't matter. And, you know, but on the negative side, if I now go and miss in the cache and it takes me 300 cycles, then I want to keep things fully busy, I need 300 threads if you're switching every cycle. And one of the extreme examples was Horton Smith built a machine called the Denelcor app, again, sold to, you know, the government. It had so many threads. And, you know, it didn't even feel the need for caches, okay? You don't, you know, because, okay, if you can tolerate 300-cycle latency, then why do you need to have a cache to reduce the latency if you can tolerate it, okay? Now, this is sort of, in a sense, more, you know, one way of looking at it that, hey, you can get by without caches. But these are, you know, these are machines that are designed for workloads that even if you had a cache, it won't work that well because they'll be missing all the time. You know, say I have a 64 kilobyte cache and I have a megabyte matrix that I'm, you know, multiplying and getting through there, unless I play off my blocking tricks and all the other kind of tricks and so on like that, you're going to get misses pretty much all the time, okay? And in fact, the vector machines, remember we talked about the vector machines when they were streaming vectors from memory, okay? They didn't have vector registers. Those vector machines were designed before they had caches and they worked very well, okay? The Cray vector machines, the vector registers were designed after people knew about caches, okay? But they were working with, you know, big data, big matrices. Caches weren't going to work, so they did not expend the resources on adding caches, just working with, you know, getting data from memory to those vector load instructions. What they did have is they had an enormous number of banks in the memory to get that bandwidth, okay? 32 banks, or 64 banks, the Cray XMPs that had four vector processors had like 256 banks of memory, okay? They didn't have caches, all right? So in this more definite, you know, world is that, you know, you in a sense can say, look, you know, I don't need caches. So now, you know, again, going back to, you know, emergence of applications like Facebook, huge data structures, caches are not going to work, okay? And so people even contemplated building fine-grained multi-threading machines that are switched on every cycle. And I know some of the Sun Niagara machines actually came around at the right time where they were available and things like Facebook were just, you know, taken off or, you know, coming into fruition. So, you know, but, you know, they had lots of register, they had register windows and lots of register so they didn't quite succeed. But, you know, there were many, many people saying, hey, you know, we're building multi-threading machines in some sense for those applications because the little agency caches just don't work. Okay, so in fine-grained multi-threading, basically the pipeline looks like here now. So I have many register files, I have many program counters, one per thread, okay? And so I'm switching between these every cycle, switching between the register files every cycle. And now in the pipeline I have, you know, red thread, yellow thread, green thread, you know, different threads all living in the pipeline at the same time. That's not, that wasn't the case in this fine-grained multi-threading, if you will. Of course in multi-threading. Question so far? Yeah. When we talk about this threading, is this like the classic idea of threading like you would have in a P thread? Or like the OS can't run multiple processes because they're sharing the memory space, the memory address space? I'm not sure which way this is going. That's a very good and very timely question because I had forgotten one thing I wanted to say which is related to this. And now that brings it back up, okay? We'll get to that one, okay? So, what are the threads? What are threads? You know, what are threads, you know? They could be anything you want them to be, okay? In the Danelcore app, the different threads are different iterations of independent iterations, okay? Again, you know, you're doing those flame simulations, is, you know, I don't have caches, okay? One iteration of the loop, one thread, another iteration of the loop, another thread. Okay. Just like how GPUs and so on are supposedly the grandfather of GPUs. Burton Smith actually, you know, he was a very wonderful man. He also then influenced this. Next thing we're going to be talking about simultaneous multi-threading. There's a person who did it went to and learned with Burton and to learn about multi-threading, but yeah, no, this... And Burton also, you know, worked a lot with the government, so he knew all the agencies, even though they didn't exist. So yeah, okay. Now, when you are getting to, when you are getting to, for this courseware multi-threading over here, it was just basically another one of those transactions coming in from the casino, okay? Now, let's get to this simultaneous multi-threading. We'll talk about what simultaneous multi-threading is a little bit, see the, you know, what are the issues that come up, and then we'll talk a little bit more about the type of threads over there. What a thread, you know, in a sense, could be anything that, you know, any program of some kind or parts of a program or a process or sharing this or not, whatever it is, et cetera, okay? So what happened with the, you know, simultaneous multi-threading is, you know, people started building these out of order issue machines, okay? So, you know, I'm doing this four-wide out of order issue machine, but it's not getting that, because I do not want to get the performance benefits of that, okay? Also, what we now know is, hey, L1 miss, I can tolerate it, 10 cycle latency, I can tolerate it with my out of order issue machine. So I don't want to do multi-threading for that. Okay, all right. Then, should I do multi-threading and switch out somehow from a different whatever, okay? But instead, what I could do is, now, you know, the out of order processor, we talked at the back end of the out of order processor, okay? There are the functional units. There is the reorder buffer. There is the load store queue. There is the data caches, okay? Et cetera, et cetera. And all those structures are just working with sets of bits. You don't care where those sets of bits came from. Okay, I don't care if I have this, you know, I don't know this floating point multiply came from the red side or this second other floating point multiply came from the blue, right? Which of them is ready, I can use my floating point multiplier form. Okay, so, you know, what you do in this simultaneous multi-threading, and you'll see a little bit more of the detail over there, okay, is you are going to try and tolerate all the latencies by just overlapping things from multiple threads at the same time. And sacrifice maybe only a little single thread performance, okay? And what you're basically doing is, in a sense, you're trying to issue threads in a round robin fashion, but not quite. You're actually going to try and even fetch instructions from multiple threads at the same time. And once you fetch instructions from multiple threads, and you dump them into the backend, the backend doesn't care. And then when you're done with them, you can put them back into the right thread, if you would. Okay? So, the thread scheduling policy is, in a sense, it's like right robin, but this is, you know, that paper that talks about the iCount, the exporting choice paper that you have on your assigned reading. And the pipeline partitioning is dynamic somehow, okay? And so, this has been used very widely. The Intel processor uses it, processor uses it, IBM uses it. AMD, for a while, shied away from it, and then they went to it, and then they went back again out of it, and I think they went back to having something like this again. So, what do you do now? Here was your out of order processor, map table, reorder buffer, okay? Writer's file, you know, physical writer's proof, if you would, instruction cache branch predictor. You replicate the map tables, but you share the physical register file, and then, let's see, we'll see what happens to the reorder buffer and the node store queue, somehow they get shared. Okay, so the thread scheduler would select between the different threads, and actually, we would actually, maybe even fetch from multiple threads, at the same time. The cache then gets somehow shared, branch predictor, okay, map table, separate map tables, and then, based on how the instructions are fed, the reorder buffer, these are not contiguous, by the way, sorry, you know, somehow the reorder buffer gets shared, okay, and it could be contiguous, it's not contiguous, conceptually it's contiguous, physically it may not be, okay? The physical register file somehow gets shared, the data cache somehow gets shared. Okay, so, you know, and again, what happens here now is, it depends, you know, if I fetch now, I could be fetching two instructions from the red thread, one from the blue thread, and one from the green thread, and they'll get sent to the backend, and somehow they'll execute over there. Next cycle, I'd be fetching two from the blue thread, one from the red, and I may not be able to fetch any, I may be trying to fetch two from the red, but I could only fetch one. Are you with me on this? All right. So, now, you're saying, hey, all the stuff that we learned, I need caches to get low latency instruction access, instruction cache. I need data caches to get low latency data access. If I'm sharing the instruction cache, with another thread, am I not going to have more instruction cache misses? Why is that not sacrificing my single thread latency a lot? If I'm sharing the data cache, am I not going to have more data cache misses? Isn't that going to hurt my single thread latency? Cache interference is a general concern for all the multi-threading variants. So, the question that people ask is, can the cache working sets of multiple threads fit in the caches? And then, and now, comes the applications where what do you have, you know, many times what you have is a web server. Say you have a web server. Okay. What's a web server doing? It's, you know, getting something at the end part going through some piece of code, figuring out what to do. Another request comes in, going through perhaps the same piece of code. Of course, maybe different branches through the different pieces of code. But a lot, same functions, a lot of commonality. Another thread comes in, very similar thing. Okay. So, whereas what we've talked about in general, a little bit about, hey, if I'm doing multiple programs, you know, and running on the hardware at the same time, I have multiple instructions, multiple data, M, I, and D. Okay. And if I now share the multiple instructions from different programs in the same instruction cache, I'm going to get interference. If I share the completely different sets of data in the same data cache, I'm going to get interference. Okay. But if I had some of these server kind of applications that I have streams of requests coming in and I'm serving those requests, that is what people call, you start calling single program multiple data. All right. So they have the similar set of instructions, if you will. So they can share the I cache. Okay. And they also have a fair amount of data in common. And so there is less data cache contention. All right. Further, some of the arguments they use is, look, hey, you know, does the working set of one of those threads fit in the cache? If it doesn't, then I already, the cache is not going to, you know, give me lots and lots of heads. So if I create more interference, it's going to give me fewer heads. But how much fewer? Okay. Now, I mean, clever people can come up with all sorts of arguments that actually sound reasonable until you actually do the analysis to figure out what's going on. Okay. So the cache interference does not, you know, claim that, in many cases, cache interference does not hurt. Now, what you do want, okay, so we talked about instruction-level parallelism. We have latencies. We are overlapping, hiding those latencies by overlapping with the execution of other instructions. Okay. Now, we also talked about non-blocking caches, and, you know, what was going on over there? I had a miss. I had a miss, cache miss. Rather than wait for something to come back, I tried to overlap, tolerate that cache miss with some other execution of other instructions, which include cache hits. You know, through arithmetic instruction but other loads that were cache hits, you know, but then also including loads from the same program that were ending up in cache misses. So just like when I have, you know, instruction execution latencies, I'm overlapping with the execution of other instructions. When I have a miss latency, a memory access latency, I want to have more parallelism to tolerate that long latency memory operation. And I want to tolerate that with more long latency memory operations. Okay. So in a sense, what I want to do is I want to have a situation where I have memory-level parallelism, where I have multiple memory access operations going on in parallel. You know, I can do that to a limited fashion from the misses of one thread, but I can now get those additional misses from another thread, which is also missing a lot, which is what's happening for most of these big server protocols. Okay. So now getting to your friends' questions. All right. So this is your typical server friends handling user requests. Okay. If I have this, and so they're all accessing the same memory. Okay. So anything that we have to do with making sure of the access, we see that when we talk about multi-process or blocks, et cetera, all that shared memory stuff, et cetera. Okay. But, you know, once you have that, then it just becomes a question of what the operating system decides to use and then schedule at the same time. Make sense? So just so I'm clear on this. If the operating system has to know scheduling these two threads, right? Meaning like today in a Linux machine, those two hyperthreads could be completely isolated processes. So this is a different architecture from that. Those could be isolated processes, but typically not, because they're going to interfere in these structures and really do instruction and data caches and really degrade the performance significantly. That's why we always dream about hyperthreading. That's why. No, no, no. So the way I like to, you know, we had come up with these ideas a long time ago when we were doing this stuff, and I never liked it that much. Because the way I sort of like to do it is, you know, at that time, sort of the big vehicle that everyone loved to hate, because it was a big gas cathode of a Hummer. Okay, so it was one of these, you know, army Humvees, civilian version of that, burnt a lot of gas, and I say, hey, it's like, okay, you got a Hummer and now you're a single man, and my Hummer is, you know, taking too much gas, maybe I should carpool. Okay. That has issues. So you don't carpool. Okay, yeah. So generally just across this hardware threads are usually just sort of seen as like separate CPUs, right? Yeah, separate virtual CPUs as far as the operating system is concerned. Okay. They're CPUs, yeah. How does the operating system itself to the CPU's perspective is just another process? So under cases where you really need to go and modify those, you know, supervisor level registers and those accesses, what does, what happens then? Do you like report back to a single gridded mode for the duration of this OS? Say that again, say that again. We have some registers which are locked away to supervisor level, right? Not just the internal. And to the CPU, it doesn't matter, like the OS is just another process. So if the OS wants to come in and do a lot of, you know, kind of critical stuff, the report that that's being back into a single gridded machine now. Does everybody hear that question? Someone want to help me? I'll help. The OS isn't really a process, right? You make a system call. The machine that's running jumps into supervisor mode and that core starts doing whatever the heck you want it to do. You do the system, the read or whatever it is. You turn from that system call in your thread, then leave supervisor mode and goes on. There are no, well, there are kernel threads doing some background stuff. But in general, the OS has not got anything running. And that is like, you know, whenever you have a call of some kind, there are certain calls, there are certain, you know, OS activities that, you know, say you're running, I have 600 instructions running from three different threads and, you know, one of them makes a call of some kind. It bothers the OS a little bit. Okay? What happens? Okay? In some cases, for some of them, the others can keep running. And this one gets Angela. For others, you have to clean everything off. Everything. Who yeses before you can handle any of that stuff. Okay? Because, especially because there are several, you know, we talked about sharing, you know, some of the state registers, et cetera, and so on like that. They are control registers. And they're trying to bypass values from control registers, et cetera, I guess, to be used nicely. Okay? So you just basically, you do that so rarely. OS, I'm currently using the machine. Okay, OS, I'm leaving. Okay? What you need to do, and move things along. And then we have multiple threads within the same, let's say, ROB, right? And we get multiple styles of exceptions. How do we only parse the ROB entries that we know by this L? Like, let's say you get a div divided by zero on thread B. Now, we only want to parse the ROB entries for thread B. Okay, we are out of time. But, we'll get back to, get there next time. What happens to these? ROB looks for Q, et cetera, et cetera.
