Title: ECE757 - GPUs (Part 1)
Source file: ECE757 - GPUs (Part 1).mp4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Finally, about to close out the interconnects topic. We're almost there. Bear with me. Last time we were discussing flow control and the implication on deadlocks. We're going to finish up the flow control discussion and discuss the last piece of interconnects, which is router microarchitecture. And then we'll move on to the GPU stuff and then towards the heterogeneous and accelerator things. Okay, so the last piece of flow control that we didn't get a chance to go through last time was the buffer back pressure piece. So how do you actually deal with the fact that buffers are finite in size? So you need some form of mechanism to prevent the overflow. And the only reason why this is a little bit of a consideration is because when you connect to routers, there is still some delay associated with even any form of signaling, not just with sending the data, but also for signaling of things like my buffer is about to overflow, et cetera. So you need to then trade off how often you do signaling and how precise you want the control of the buffer utilization to be. So in NOX, I know it wasn't necessarily explicitly said before, but the network on chip that we assume for a chip multiprocessor are lossless. That means packets are never dropped. Every packet that is injected into the network is eventually expected and guaranteed to arrive and eject from the network at its destination. So contrast that to internetworking, the internet, which uses TCPIP and other internet protocols that allows for packets to be dropped arbitrarily because it's built to be robust against nodes and routers themselves dropping from the network arbitrarily. At any moment in time, you could lose a wifi connection and the world doesn't end. So in NOX, there's a different story. We need to build the entire system to be lossless, but that's okay because when you build your entire multiprocessor anyway, all the other compute components, cache components are expected to be reliable already. You can make your interconnect that interconnects these also reliable too. So there are two main types of buffer back pressure flow control mechanisms that you're expected to see in the literature. The first one that you'll see most commonly is credit-based flow control. I've used this term before. All that simply means is each upstream router, so the sender, maintains credit count of the available space in all of its downstream routers. So if I am capable of going north, south, east, or west, then the north router about my north neighbor, my south neighbor, my east neighbor, and my west neighbor are all potential downstream routers because I could send the packet to all of them. So I will maintain the number of credits, which is just the number of space left, the number of flits left in the buffers of each of my neighbors. So that's all that simply means. So then when you do that, when the credit count goes to zero, it simply means that there is no more space, so I should stop sending. So we'll get into the exact processing pipeline within a router in a few slides. We'll assume right now that when there is space available and we're ready to send out a flit from our router, it takes three cycles. There is a processing pipeline, that takes three cycles, let's say. So when we have our upstream and a downstream router, what could happen is when the downstream router frees up space and sends out a flit from the buffer that we are vying for, the virtual channel, whatever it may be, a credit will be sent back towards us to let us know that there is now space at that buffer downstream. So this credit will usually take the same link delay that the data is also taking to. So if we're assuming a one cycle link delay, then they'll both take one cycle. So that credit will go out simultaneously and we will receive it. That signals to us that we can now begin processing another flit to send over to the downstream router because now we know there is space. So we will have a three cycle processing pipeline to do this. We will then send that flit over with a one cycle delay, which subsequently also sends a credit backwards because we are now freeing up a buffer slot in our router, so we should tell our upstream router that we've freed up a spot. And then when this flit arrives, it itself will also incur the three cycle processing at the downstream router before it's eventually sent out. So this is the typical procedure and it's a simple handshake where we're able to count and using these signals, be able to tell us how much space we have available at any moment in time. Now, if you want to have good performance, you need to figure out what the credit round trip delay is and that's simply the time between, the time it takes for having freed up a slot in your router to being at that point where then that slot is consumed and then freed up again. So this is effectively for a single credit the entire lifetime of one slot in your router. And if the credit round trip delay here in this case is eight cycles, then you need to have at least eight flits size of a buffer if you want to get maximum performance because you need to keep yourself busy and constantly be sending out flits at every cycle if you want maximum performance. So the longer this flit processing pipeline and the longer the delay incurred by your credit links and the credit signaling, the bigger the size of the buffers that you'll need. Of course, it doesn't mean that things won't work properly if you had smaller buffers. You just won't get a perfectly smooth pipeline. There will be delays and stalls in there because you just have either nothing to process or there is no space available in your buffers. So the general rule of thumb with any simple credit-based flow control mechanism, figure out how long it takes for this credit round trip and then have enough flit buffers available and then you will in theory be able to get maximum performance and utilization. Now this involves a lot of signaling in order to send the credits. Every time a flint goes downstream, a credit signal goes upstream. So we always have bi-directional signaling traffic every single time. Now a credit signal is tiny. It doesn't change the fact that it's still incurring some form of energy to go up and needs to be processed by the pair of routers that are dealing with the credits. So if you wanna sort of trade off the amount of signaling for potentially a little bit worse performance, the more basic implementation is on-off flow control. Because the router pipelines tend to be deterministic in how long they'll take, then you could just have sort of a threshold that says, hey, my buffer is at such capacity, I will send an on signal so that I can now take on more information, more flits and then subsequently take an off signal. Say for example, we have six flit buffers in the downstream and we have a one cycle flit processing pipeline and a one cycle link delay. So upstream sends some flits. Each cycle it's able to send down a flit to the downstream router. And then at some point, the downstream router will have a threshold that you will carefully set. In this case, if it has a six flit buffer size, it knows that the link delay is one cycle and the processing delay is one cycle. So when it gets the fourth flit, it should be ready to send the signal back to say, hey, stop sending more. So that by the time this signal is able to be processed upstream, you have exactly your buffer size so that you don't overflow your buffer downstream. Okay, so this will depend on the delay it takes to send the signal and it takes to send flits down. So you will just send that and time it accordingly and that's usually fine because everything is deterministic in terms of how long things take the process, generally speaking. So now say the downstream router was stalled in some way and wasn't able to send out these flits and it gets an on signal. So now with one cycle processing pipeline, it's able to start sending out flits. It'll do the same process and it'll have a threshold to send an on signal. And then you could set this sort of aggressively if you want, it could have been sent earlier because you started freeing up space right away. But the upper bound that you'd want to send it is such that by the time you've exhausted all your flits, you immediately have a new flit to process, ready to go. Okay, so this on signal, for example, is timed to be the latest it should be, in which case a flit has arrived right here at the end which will take one cycle to process and it should be able to be sent out after the sixth flit goes out of the downstream. So with this, you then control just how the level of signaling that you want to do. So you're not constantly sending signals back and forth and every time a new flit leaves. Otherwise, if this is credit-based flow control, if you recall, we're going to send out a credit this way, a credit this way, a credit this way, a credit this way every single time we send something off. So that's the trade-off in terms of performance that you'll get and the amount of signaling overhead that's induced. Okay, any questions on that? So that's the last bit of flow control. We're doing the last quick piece which is the router microarchitecture because it's important to know and you need to walk out of this course with a little bit of this knowledge. So effectively, the router microarchitecture just describes a high level concept of the circuitry and logic within the routers that implements everything that we've discussed so far. And so your baseline router and the one that you're going to see in most standard places is going to look something like this. There will be a set of input ports over here. Usually you'll see it depicted as five because the most common topology will be a two-dimensional mesh which has a north, south, east, west input as well as the input of your injection, the node, the processor and cache that's connected to the router. You can view it as the driveway of this intersection. So this is the standard. And then the output is the same thing, northbound, eastbound, southbound, westbound and ejection into the driveway. So then the router components is simply, generally speaking, the routers will be input buffered. So the buffers that hold the flits and packets will be at the input ports and not the output ports, though both are possible. And the whole idea is for each input port, we've talked about there will be multiple virtual channels, VCs. Sometimes these will be broken up into different virtual networks. This might be a virtual network for request packets. This might be a virtual network for response packets. All that simply means is that depending on the type of your coherence packet, your coherence message, there will be a subset of the VCs that you're allowed to take. And if you recall, the whole point of that was to get rid of protocol-level deadlock because a response should never have to be blocked behind a request. If a request gets stuck, then that request may be stuck because it's waiting on the response to arrive and it shouldn't subsequently be blocking that response. Okay, and then there's gonna be multiple steps that we're gonna discuss in a moment. So as I mentioned, knock routers tend to be input buffered, and then there is a typical five-stage pipeline. Just like we learned with processors, there's typically a five-stage pipeline, and that doesn't include the link traversal because this can vary on the delay, even within a single network. Some links can be longer than others, so the traversal through the links can vary in time. But there's usually a five-stage pipeline that occurs when you enter, when you're inside a router at each hop. So first piece is assume we have a flit that has just entered our router. It's all the way down here, tiny little orange in the bottom. Okay, it has entered this input five port. Say this is the south input port, so this is coming from underneath the router. So there's the south input port entering here. The first stage is a buffer write, which simply looks at the metadata of the flit and then figures out which VC it's supposed to be in. And you know that ahead of time at the previous router, as we'll see in a moment, when you do that stage in this router. So in this case, this flit was bound for VC3 of that port. So that's the first stage. It's a simple stage, buffer write. The next stage is the routing computation. What that means is with the routing computation, if you are at the head and you are ready to compute where you're going to go next, you need to figure out where you're going to turn in this router. Am I gonna take the output one? Am I gonna go northbound, eastbound, southbound, et cetera, depending on where my flit is bound for. So in this case, say we figure out that, hey, we're gonna go take the east output. So that means I will be looking at my east neighbor router and I am bound to go to their west input port because that's what will be connected to my east output port at the current route. So the route computation simply says, hey, the turn you are going to take now, you came from the, in this case, let's pretend I came from south, you are now going to go and turn right to the east. So you figure that out during route computation. All the while, you are still sitting in this VC spot that you've been holding. Then the next stage, you will do virtual channel allocation, so VC allocation. What that simply means is once you've figured out the potential places you can turn to, you have to pick a VC among them that is free that you can take. This will fail if all the VCs are full and you'll just have to sit there and wait. What if there's one available? Say you've identified VC four is available for us. Then you will reserve it and eat up a credit in the credit counter that you have here in your allocator. Then once that's good to go, you have a spot reserved. You have a free spot that you're able to go in the downstream router. You will now try to time multiplex and use the switch so that you can use the physical link because there are four VCs here. There's a whole bunch of VCs here that could all be vying for this output port that a lot of people wanna go east at any moment in time. We have to take turns and time multiplex through that. That's the reason why we call the virtual channels. We have four ports coming in or four VC buffers available, virtual channels, but it's only one link, so we have to time multiplex through it. So switch allocation simply says, hey, let me vie for this. And if I win, then that means in the next cycle I can proceed to the switch traversal, which lets me finally leave the VC, traverse through the crossbar. This should always work because I wouldn't have one switch allocation otherwise if there was a conflict. And then finally is link traversal. And then everything starts again in the next router. We will then proceed to buffer write starting in the next router. Question here first. Right, so if you're stuck here because in VC allocation you're still stuck, you don't succeed, there's no available free slot, then what you'll have to do is anyone behind you, so among these three flip buffers, we'll have to wait behind you. So the head of line blocking is limited to everyone in your lane, just like in real life. If you're trying to turn right but there's a pedestrian that's walking really slowly, you will have to stop there and everyone behind you on the right turn lane is also paused, but people going straight shouldn't have to wait behind you. They assume you have a right turn lane. Is there a question there? So in the VA stage here, you're not writing to this. What you're doing is you are declaring that that's where you're bound to go. So you could think of your VC allocator has the credit counts. Say this is the input one, it'll have the credit counts for sort of that input this port here from your neighbor router and then you will be decrementing one of them to say I am going to consume that slot. That way you guarantee you have somewhere to go so that if you traverse this link, you're not just showing up at the router and be like I have nowhere to go, then you're going to be a lost packet. Okay. So this is a typical five-stage pipeline. So it is a pipeline just like with any pipeline. The only difference in consideration is that it's not entirely the same for all the flits of a packet. So in this case if we have like a four-flit packet, only the head flits, as mentioned before, is responsible for doing things like the routing computation and for picking the VC. The head basically, in other words, decides we are going to turn left and we are going to take the third lane. Then everyone in the convoy behind it will follow suit. So that stage just needs to be encoded in the router itself and part of that VC. So then none of the body flits and the tail flit have to do any of those stages. But it's still a pipeline so they will have to consume idle cycles during those stages in order to do it. Okay. So then at the end of the day, as briefly discussed before, when we have a wormhole flow control, so flip-based flow control system, then your zero load packet latency, recall zero load packet latency, that simply means in the absence of any contention, would be the serialization delay associated with your packet. So someone tell me again, what is the serialization delay? Say my link bandwidths can support one flit per cycle and my packets are five flits in size. What is the serialization delay? Is that a hand or is that a five? I picked five for a reason. Yeah, so your serialization delay is gonna be five cycles. It simply is a mandatory delay you're always going to incur because your five flit size packet can't move all as one because your channels, your physical links are not big enough the whole thing. So at some point in the network you're gonna have to do this serialized piece by piece, one at a time and there will be five of us. Now if everything else is properly pipelined, you only have to incur that delay once. Then everyone else is perfectly overlapping, progressing through the interconnect from now on. Of course that changes the moment there is contention, you will pay the cost of serialization again once we have to stop at any moment in time. But beyond that it should be typically safe. So then in the absence of contention, you're paying this once and then at each hop you're expending the five stage router pipeline plus the link delay every single time. Okay, so in modern routers we're typically built for higher performance and will not usually follow this pipeline in the same way a modern processor is not your typical five stage pipeline. Example optimizations, we're not gonna go through all the details of this, just a few example ones that are common that you'll see. The first is lookahead routing. This is the easiest one to reason about. So when we show up at an intersection, we decide then and there if we're going to turn left, right or go straight. Lookahead routing simply means we can just change the logic because the topology is fixed and known ahead of time. That you can do your decision for the next intersection at the current one. So when you get to this intersection I could do the route computation in parallel to something else I'm busy doing because I already know which way I'm turning. And then now I will just do route computation for it. So I know here pre-computed that I'm going to turn left at this intersection. And when I turn left, I know I'm gonna next hit, I'm gonna hit, I don't know, West Johnson or something next. Then I'm gonna decide now here at this point what I'm gonna do when I hit that intersection. So you always do it one step, one hop ahead. And that's sufficient. That way then you can concurrently do route computation with any of the other stages in the current router. A common case would be to do it during VC allocation. Okay, so now you save yourself one pipeline stage for your router. Another common one is speculation. We are allocating two things, technically speaking. We are allocating which lane we're gonna take in our neighbor, in our downstream router when we eventually get there. And we are allocating the switch, the chance to access the crossbar in our router on the next cycle, because we have the time multiplex. There is four lanes going east, but there is only one physical link going east. So if there's four of us all trying to go east, we're all going to have to wait and serialize one after another. In the absence of a lot of traffic, then you could expect that a lot of time, these will succeed. So let's just speculate and do it ahead of time. I will preemptively try to get access to the switch, assuming that I will successfully get a lane, a VC downstream. And if that fails, I will then have to incur here a proper switch allocation stage in between, just like with a regular pipeline. But if it succeeds, then with that extra logic, hopefully I've saved myself a full cycle at each hop. And these kinds of optimizations make sense simply because, as we talked about before, the utilization of the network tends to be low. Contention is rare. You do want high throughput when contention is high and there is a burst of traffic. But the general case is that you are not experiencing anybody on the road on the way to where you're trying to go, so you can speculate. And finally, the last piece is pure bypassing. It's easy to take in sort of a little OR signal that quickly can tell if any of the input buffers are occupied to begin with, the same way that we can quickly see that when we get to a stop sign, there's absolutely no one at any point, and then we could illegally just drive through the stop sign and go straight. Now, you shouldn't be doing this, but in theory, that's what you can do in a system like this. So you will walk in, you see the input buffers are free. Why bother doing the buffer write stage? Just do everything that I'm going to do, write computation, vibe for the switches, and hopefully, if there is an available VC, I will be totally fine. But then what could also happen is someone is coming in at the exact same moment from a different port that I don't see. They're not in the input buffers. I don't see them, but they're also doing the exact same thing. So then we will potentially contend and have a conflict. We have to detect that as well. So here's some examples of what's going on. So say packet A arrives, and it's coming in from the south input, and it's going to show up with a quick signal. It's going to be able to see that no one's there. So it's going to, before trying to write into the VC and to occupy a slot, it'll just preemptively do its look ahead writing computation. So it's figuring out its turn for the next hop, not the current hop. It already knows where it's going to turn, and it wants to go east at this point. So it's going to figure out where it wants to go after it goes east. And then it's going to figure out, is there a VC, a lane available eastbound from here? And then hopefully there is. And then also speculatively check, is there going to be a conflict if I try to take this crossbar to go east right now? And there's no one else in the road. So I will go ahead and say, hey, in the very next cycle, I will then do the switch traversal. And then I am out. And then the next cycle after that, I am already doing link traversal. And all is good because there is a guaranteed spot. My VC allocation should have succeeded. There's a guaranteed spot and lane for me to go to eastbound. Now what could happen though is I can show up and two of us could show up at the exact same time and both see that the input buffers are entirely free. Now we both might show up. We will do the same thing. But then if we're both bound to the same output, for example, that'll signal a conflict. So our speculation would then fail. We will have to do buffer right as normal and then try again in the second cycle. So we will both do buffer right. We're both coming from two different places. B is coming from the north and A is coming from the south, but they both want to go east. So then when this happens, they will do this. This is still speculatively doing switch allocation. And say only one of them succeeds. So in this case, because the switch allocation only lets one of them go through the switch at any moment in time, because there's only one physical length for E, let's say B wins. So then B will be able to go in the third cycle and A will have to go in the fourth cycle. Okay, so more often than not, the router can still function as normal in the presence of this level of aggressive speculation. And what that could do is it could save you sort of a delay in your zero load latency that's proportional to the number of hops in your network. So for scalability purposes, when there is low utilization of your network, that's a really, really favorable trade off. Because you can potentially have to travel tens to hundreds of hops away for a very big multi-core multiprocessor. And if you have to do that, it will be great to save yourself tens to hundreds of cycles as well. Okay. So then the little pieces of the router microarchitecture to note. So first of all, the buffer organization. So we've talked about this before. You have one physical channel for each of your input ports, one physical link, but generally multiple VCs. Usually the way to organize this is a simple set of fixed length queues. But as I talked about before, you could use a general memory as your input buffer for each port. And with this, it gives you a way to dynamically program the size of your VCs and queues. For example, the common reason why is some of your VCs may be set for requests. So request messages tend to be tiny. A lot of them are just like, get me data, get me exclusive access. And then responses can be a little bit bigger because it usually will be a gigantic cache line that the directory is handing over to you. So because of that, you could change the size of each of your VCs, depending on which lanes are expected to be used for certain types of coherence messages. There is, this is a natural trade-off of just more complex circuitry needed to maintain this for potential benefit in the performance and buffer utilization in your network. So naturally having shallow VCs versus deep VCs is always going to be a trade-off. It's just note that shallow VCs is only possible when you have wormhole. As we talked about before, when you have packet-based or message-based flow control, then at the end of the day, your buffers have to be at least as big as the size of a single packet. But if you do flip-based flow control, like we saw in the last paper review, then in that kind of circumstance, then you can be aggressive and your lanes can be the size of a single car in your convoy. Everything should still work correctly. So with that, you can opt for a scenario where if I give you 20 VCs in your router to use, you could just use that to create 20 lanes, each of one size, right? And that has obviously extreme trade-offs that could be good for lots of traffic and preventing anyone from head-of-line blocking. It's like a road that has, I don't know, five left-turn lanes and 10 right-turn lanes available to you, something like that, versus one that's deeper and has now head-of-line blocking but makes the allocation process much less complex. Because trying to allocate all of this, if I have 10 people trying to turn right, just trying to decide who gets the turn right is tricky if there's only like two spots for them to turn right. Okay, other piece? Yes, you could. So some people have proposed, mostly for the purpose of dealing with deadlocks as opposed to for performance, but you could implement any of the VCs as priority queues and then the priority information would just have to be embedded in the flits themselves. That said, to make that simplified, that priority information typically will have to be embedded in all of the flits of your packet, not just the header. So you'll have to accommodate space in each of the flits otherwise a priority queue will have a little bit of, it'll be really complex to try to rip out sort of an arbitrary length set of entities from within the queue otherwise. But yes, you could very well do a priority queue. Something that's not really possible in the real life road analogy. Unless, it'll be like your car just, there's like a monster truck so you could lift yourself above and go above another car in front of you, one day. So the other pieces are the crossbar within. So this is the intersection design that just connects the input ports to the output ports once you have a lane to go to in the end. So common ways are to you do this using MUXsys. I don't know if you guys have already seen this kind of stuff before in other courses but it's simply just deciding for any of the five inputs some mechanism to then allow them to go but you can't have a conflict. You can't have two packets using the same input at the same cycle. They're gonna have to serialize behind each other and you can't have two packets being arbitrated for the same output at the same cycle. But in theory, you could have perfect parallelism if each, you have five packets all coming from five different inputs all going to five unique outputs. That could all happen in a single cycle. The MUX select signals can make that happen. The other way you'll usually see crossbars implemented is with tri-state buffers. It will usually be a grid that looks something like this and it simply means then if we, this whoever is here and wants to go east then this will simply activate and let the signal go downward and be read out by the east port, output port. And again, it's the same thing. You can kind of view it as diagonals and that'll be relevant when we get to the allocation process in a moment but like a diagonal here can perfectly happen concurrently because what that means is we are all coming from different inputs and we are all going to different outputs and that is totally okay. And then there are other variants of diagonals that would also work something like this would also be totally fine too. And then in terms of crossbar you might see this term in the literature, crossbar speed up. That usually just means that you are raising the number of inputs for the crossbar higher than the number of outputs. So it's more of a many to less than many mapping. So usually you would have sort of a one-to-one mapping. So north inputs and a north output and then vice versa all the way down. But as we saw before, you could have multiple VCs. So if you allow for them to divide for the crossbar as well you could have a 10 to five crossbar which is bigger. But then you can now allow for example two people coming from the north to use the crossbar in the same cycle as long as they're buying for different outputs, okay? In theory you could do the same thing with the output but there's no benefit because the outputs doesn't have the VCs. They just have one physical link that you're gonna have to serialize for anyway. Okay, and the last piece is how the allocators are built. This is a whole area in sort of CAD and EDA communities. And that's something that we wanna go into too much in detail. I'll just talk about some of the common ones that you'll see. But effectively an allocator is just something that matches some N amount of requests and requesters to M available resources. And then an arbiter is a special case of an allocator. This is the general term that just has one resource that they're vying for. And in some cases like we'll see later on you could build allocators by composing arbiters together. So when we talk about this, this is for the VC allocation and switch allocation stages. So our requester is the packets for these allocations and then the resources are either the VCs in the VC allocation or the crossbar switch ports in the switch allocation. So, and the goal of the allocator at the end of the day is to have a high likelihood of providing matching. It's because each input packet may have multiple potential resources that they're vying for. We want to maximize and be able to support more of them at the same time, but to trade this off with the design complexity of the hardware because we want things to be fast and ideally pipelined as well. So one example, one that you'll see and more of the complex kinds is a wavefront allocator. So there's a lot of text. Let's just get into what, how it does because it's much easier to reason about visually. But you predefined wavefronts and wavefront mappings. Usually this matches. So it's just like how we saw with the crossbar, how a wave can happen in parallel. You want to try assigning resources to requesters along these diagonals because that's what allows them to get concurrent access. So say we have the request signals will be coming in on the left and then the resources represent the columns, the different columns that they're vying for. So say we have an example here where the top most requester is happy with either resource zero one or two. If this is your VC allocator, it's like saying, hey, whoever's in VC zero right now is happy to go output to VC zero, VC one or VC two. If this is your switch allocator, then whoever is in the north input is happy to go either in this case, north, south, east or west. I'm happy to go take a U-turn, I'm happy to go south, I'm happy to go east, but I don't want to go in this direction. So that's just what it's trying to say. So whatever use case of your allocator it is that you're just mapping requesters to resources. So then the way the wavefront allocator will work is it'll go through, in this case there are four waves. It'll start with the first wave and what it does is insert a token on all the corresponding cells that belong to this wave. So that's these ones right here. So this is a diagonal. If you view this as having a wraparound through the entire grid, this is one valid diagonal because it's kind of just like a diagonal up this way except this one wrapped around, back to the left. Okay, so this is a valid one where if we can allocate everyone here, they would all be able to get a resource and there would be zero conflicts. So we will set a token there and then anyone who's among this wave who hasn't already gotten a token will consume it. So in this case here, this person will consume this token and then everyone else has a simple mechanism to propagate their tokens down and right by one. All that means is we're moving to the next diagonal to propagate our tokens. So now we are looking at this wave. So we're looking at this wave which has these two again wrapped around. Let's try to assign them a resource if there are any, if there are no conflicts. So in this case, we will see that this person is able to be granted but these two won't be. The one at the top here is because Requestor A already got a resource so they shouldn't get another one. And down here, this resource is already taken by Requestor A so it shouldn't be taken by Requestor B as well. But this one is perfectly fine. So we will give them that and then it moves on. Tokens are passed to the next wave. So this is this wave. Easier to draw it this way now. This one wrapped around. So then again, we will be able to consume this token and it will check the last wave and there are no more tokens to be consumed. And all the wavefronts have been propagated. So this doesn't necessarily give the optimal all the time but it still gives a really pretty good allocation. That said, the hardware complexity of it, it's also not entirely pipelineable. You have to wait the full delay of, in this case, four cycles worth of token exchange in order for the allocation to complete. But it gives you a nice allocation and now three of our requesters, four people requesting things but three of them managed to get a resource which is pretty darn good. And it's probably the best case. It is the best case we would have gotten with this set right now. Now to trade off with performance though, you may want something that's a little bit less hardware complex as well as pipelineable. That you could do allocation sort of to match your router pipeline and not extend that any further. So the way you would usually do this is to do multiple stages of arbiters. So an example of a four three allocator where we have four requesters vying for three resources would be to have the first stage first reduce one resource for each requester and you would do this using four three to one arbiters. So say requester zero again wants ABC as its resources and requester one wants A and B as its resource. The first stage is to say hey, requester zero is like hey, say you're like a dessert place and they have a limited menu. They're only offering a cake, a croissant and ice cream. And requester zero is like hey, I want all three. So the first stage is to say you're only gonna get one. Let's figure out which one you're going to get. So you're gonna run it through a three to one arbiter and it's gonna run independently of requester one's arbiter. Requester one says I only want the cake and the croissant. So then they're gonna have to choose only one of them. So in the first stage, everyone's going to have to commit independently of which one they're gonna go for. So once everyone does that, say requester zero says okay fine, I'll go for cake. Requester one is also like I'm also gonna go for cake. Requester two is like I only want cake. And requester three says I got ice cream. So then the signals are gonna propagate through to the next stage and then now for all the people who decided they want cake, there's four possible people. We will choose one of them to win it. For all the people who decided for croissant, unfortunately no one ended up picking croissant so no one's gonna get picked. And then all the people who wanted ice cream are gonna get a selection. So only one of the three is going to win here. Requester zero is the happy one that gets the cake in the end and a requester three is the only one that will get the ice cream. So that's how this will work. This is a nice pipeline-able system now because as the second stage is happening, you could do the first stage and at the same time concurrently. That said, you can see that it's already less than optimal. A better allocation would have allowed requester one to at least get the croissant at the end. But because these happen independently and not full knowledge as like the wavefront allocator would do, it ended up picking suboptimally and then lost out on the object choice that it made. Yes. Yeah, that's a good question. So I didn't really go and elaborate into that but the most simple designs that you will see is an arbiter that's simply round robin. Fairness is usually the way you'd go and you'd want to make sure that whatever round robin sequence you're using for these, they're trying to be out of phase. And that's usually it. Another way is to use something that's pure random but it's hard to generally get something that's fairer when you do some form of random arbitration but that is one that can arguably be fair with a decent random quality. Yeah, you would want to, for example, so that they're not all initialized to pick cake. Pick first. Exactly, yeah. So I didn't go into the details but again, there's a lot of work going into how to build an arbiter that's cheap and effective, that's fair, et cetera, et cetera. But there are simple implementations in your readings on the synthesis lecture that talks about how to do a round robin arbiter. Okay, any questions? All right, we did it. We are through interconnects. We are now welcoming a new topic of GPUs. Okay, so this is, I was debating on the order that I should go through the accelerators and GPUs. I think it made more sense to go this route just because compared to other accelerators, it's easier to reason about GPUs coming from CPU land before you delve into more exotic accelerators that are built out there now. So GPUs, graphics processor and units were effectively built to target a killer app which is graphics. So rendering and other types of algorithms that you may have for processing. This was sort of propelled at the time because of economic pressure from the video game industry and multimedia, et cetera, et cetera. And it became more and more expected that you're going to see a GPU present in any mobile or computing device out there because of the kind of IO that is provided to the users. That said, with the reason for this machine learning and artificial intelligence boom is that we recognize that this thing that we built to do computation for graphics is also really, really good at a lot of the simple matrix operations that are needed to make neural networks become a real thing and particularly training them and training some massive neural network models that we didn't realize could actually happen in a reasonable amount of time are perfectly easy and simple to do when you use a graphics processing unit. So with that, when you look at a lot of the GPU stuff, it's probably a little bit less so now than it was before. But a lot of the terminologies you see will still be in the context of graphics because that's what they were built for. GPUs are effectively a bunch of shader cores as they were performing sort of the typical shader algorithms and operations that you would do in computer graphics. So a lot of the geometry is defined that way when you define how your threads and how your operations are going to be performed. But now a GPU is generally regarded as you'll see this term, actually this term is dying because it's now becoming generally assumed that your GPU is general purpose and for broader and any general use. But this term was a popular one that describes general purpose GPUs and trying to gear GPUs for regular computing. That said, it's arguable that a GPU still doesn't have the same flexibility and capability that a CPU does. For example, supporting basic things like operating systems, interrupts, and all these things are not something that you will find in a modern GPU. That said, usually that's why GPUs are still part of the accelerator land, which simply means they are a processing engine or processing entity that usually still depends on a host, a general processor, a CPU, to do some of the legwork that it needs to either initialize or wrap it up. So that's why it's still generally viewed as an accelerator. That said, the day we can get to a point where a GPU is as to or incomplete, that is it's able to perform any arbitrary operation you want as much as a CPU and it could run OSs and things, the day that comes, it could be fully independent, but that said, in my opinion, you're probably going to see a significant performance dip that is not going to make them worth sort of their market stance at the moment. So it's a bit of a tricky game. If there is a way that that can actually happen without actually compromising performance, wonderful, but at the end of the day, if I could always just ship out a CPU next to this thing that does all the legwork, then why bother? Just keep this thing as a super, super aggressive machine that's really good at the one thing it's really good at. So we'll talk about why it's really good at the one thing it's good at. But yes, it's effectively, you'll define, the term you'll see defines a kernel, so the subset of your program that is then compiled for the GPU's ISA and is then run and mapped onto the GPU is known as the kernel. We'll talk a little bit about sort of how you would write the software for that, but there's more details in other courses here that goes through that and gives you the experience to do this, so. But effectively, the point of a GPU is to target the kinds of programs you write that one, have many, many, if not many, many threads in them. The threads themselves are performing very similar operations with each other, if not the exact same operations with each other. They tend to be very compute intensive, the main goal being the amount of computation you do per unit of data that you need is high enough that you are well utilizing the computation processing pipeline that's available to you. Your control flow is very simple and straightforward. This kind of goes hand in hand with this. The idea that with minimal control flow, the higher the chance that we are performing the exact same operations. And finally, the threads are mostly independent without needing to share any memory locations nor have any synchronization with them. That's the general rule of thumb of the target applications. That said, there is growing more and more support for GPUs to be able to be strong enough to handle when some of these are not necessarily the case. And we'll talk a little bit about that, but this is generally what you're looking at as your killer app for a GP. So then with this, how do you map this to how you will actually build and design the architecture? So if you have many, many, many threads, then what that means is that you will more likely have far more threads ready to run than hardware lanes or threads that can actually process them. So it would be nice for us to build a system where we can context switch threads in and out really, really quickly, because the moment one of them has a stall, we know we have hundreds of other threads ready to run. It would be nice if they can just come in and swoop in and take that pipeline while the other thread is stopped. So that's the benefit that you get when you have an abundance of threads far more than exceeds your computing capability. Next is if we perform very similar operations, then it only makes sense for us to minimize the complexities of fetching and decoding, because if everyone is expected to run the same thing, then we only need to fetch and decode once for everybody. So the more likely our program runs the same thing, the easier it becomes to deal with the front end of our processing pipeline. Because we're compute intensive, then we can maximize the throughput of accessing our data and use sort of a more sophisticated bank memory structure that's less about latency and more about just being able to get more data at any moment in time. If control flow is going to be simple, then provide minimal, if not completely zero, support for speculation in your architecture. Why do branch prediction when there is no branches to predict, right? And then finally, if the threads are mostly independent, why support atomics and locks when there are no atomics and locks to begin with? So if you have killer apps that match this paradigm, then you can get rid of a lot of these overheads and have some very, really good performance capability as long as you're not trying to be a general purpose machine. You're just saying, I am only going to target these specific cases. And there's an argument for this as long as these specific cases are a marketable case. And that's exactly what GPUs have been targeting. So GPUs, there'll be different terms. We talked about before sort of the whole SIMD, MISD, and MIMD, right? The single instruction, multiple data, different types of parallelism. Generally, you'll see GPUs described as single program, multiple data. So they're similar to SIMD. SIMD we saw were like vector instructions, super word instructions. That said, it's a little bit trickier to call them SIMD necessarily, mostly because some threads will not necessarily be performing said instruction. We'll see why when we get to different levels of control flow. The other piece is not every thread, even though every thread is running the same 10 instructions, not every thread will be on instruction two right now. Some will be on instruction five, some will be on instruction six. So that is not the principle of SIMD. SIMD will basically say every single thread, if this is single instruction, multiple data, is on the exact same instruction. So that's just a conceptual technicality. That's so people don't like using the term SIMD for GPUs for this very reason, because fundamentally we're not always on the same instruction. Okay, so you'll see SPMD as the common term, and there may be some variance as well. Some people use single instruction multiple threads, which I don't understand, but that's also there. Okay, so the programming model for GPUs, actually there's different ways to write kernels. There's probably a lot more now. I think a lot of the terminology I'm gonna be using for these slides will be with CUDA, that's sort of the Nvidia standards for writing GPU kernels. And effectively, you will just define some form of function, which uses certain specific syntax and extensions to a common language like C. And then you would specify within there the what each thread is able to do by having some level of access to the ID of the thread that you have. And then just based on your thread ID, you would be able to know which memory locations you need to process and where you need to send them to when you are done. And then they will go to the specific ISA built for the GPU and be compiled there. And your CPU's responsibility is to send that off to the GPU for processing. Okay, so at a high level, this is how the GPU structure and architecture was built. Effectively, we know that we want to have some parallelism on our threads, and we have abundant parallelism. So we could have had them that we might have, in this case, a couple of cores that are able to fetch, decode, and execute, and then do all the typical things of our five-stage pipeline. I could run two things at the same time. So first of all, we know we have a lot of threads, so what we want to do is scale this up to many, many, many, many cores. That's obviously the appropriate thing and the right thing to do. We want to have as many cores as possible. That said, there are practical implications of this. We know we have to interconnect all of these, and there is a lot of hardware overhead, and this may not get you to the thousands of cores of computing that you may want to get. So the first thing we can do and recognize is, well, everyone is running the same thing, so what if we rip out the execution components for each of these cores, and then have them share the fetch and decode units? If everyone's running the same instructions, then let's just run these execution units in lockstep at a chunk at a time, and effectively everyone will do the add. We will decode the add, and everyone will do the add, but with their own set of registers. So you need separate ALUs to support, in this case, eight ways of multi-threading, as well as separate eight contexts. What that is is just register files and program counters, et cetera. And everyone is going through, and then we could have many of these. So that's the first key takeaway and key insight to building a GPU. So this is the fundamental building block for one SM, or a streaming multiprocessor effectively, in a GPU. They share their fetch and decode components. Next will be what happens when we have conditional branches. So it's not like they're impossible. They are still available and can be compiled in your system. That said, you have to be able to deal with them, and you can still optimize your architecture, expecting these to be very infrequent. So if everybody is running the exact same instructions all the time in lockstep, then how do we do if else statements when some of the threads will go if, and some of the threads are going to go else? Because the if conditions might be based on the data that they're processing, and we can't change the fact, and we won't know ahead of time that this thread's if statement, this thread's data is gonna be negative, and this thread's data is gonna be positive, for example. You can't know that ahead of time. So the way we do it, this is known as a concept of branch divergence, where the threads that you're running at the same time end up taking different paths in your control flow logic. So the way to do it is known as a concept of predication, if you will, or similar to that concept of predication in architecture, which is you will run both the if and the else, one after another. And if you are if only, then when the else is happening, you will do nothing. If you are else only, when the if is happening, you do nothing. So in this case here, we're at this if statement. These three threads are true. So that means when we execute the true piece of the if, they will be active, and everyone else will be sitting idly, not consuming resources. And otherwise, in the else, everyone will be doing what those three will be inactive. This still gets you the correct behavior. That said, if you're trying to have a well-optimized and good-performing GPU program, you're trying to minimize the likelihood of this happening because you are fortunately reducing your utilization by half whenever you have a divergent branch. So it works, and it's correct, but for performance purposes, you want to try to avoid it whenever possible. So then now, in the worst case, if you have an eight-way condition, if, else if, else if, else if, and everyone is completely divergent, then you are getting a very, very poor performance, and you're only using one-eighth in this case, if it's eight hardware threads, one-eighth of your utilization of your GPU. Now, how about memory stalls? Memory stalls is another source of performance overhead in a typical processing pipeline. So because we have an abundance of software threads that could run at any moment in time, the nice thing is if we have one machine that can handle, let's say, eight threads at any moment, we can run eight threads, and we can have contexts, so the register files and program counters, for even more than that. So each set of eight threads, we're gonna get to this terminology later, but we could call it a warp. So each set of those, we can have, in this case, instead of a single warp, we could have four warps of register files in our architecture. That's just extra additional memory. That way, at any moment in time, if the warp that's currently running on our ALUs happens to have a memory stall in some way because they have a cache miss, then we can very quickly switch in one of our other warps that are ready to go. They could come in, we could start fetching and decoding their instructions and start running them too in order to use the same and make sure we're never using idle resources in our GPU. And at some point, they will also have a memory stall. So when they have a memory stall, then we can put in another warp, and et cetera, et cetera. So at the end of the day, there is a potential increase in your per thread runtime because once you have your stall, you may not be able to get a spot back in for a while, depending on how many other threads preempt you. So within each thread, you may have a longer latency. But at the end of the day, it gives higher overall throughput. And as we know from any multi-threading application, you're really only as slow as your slowest thread. So being able to run everyone who can run will probably give you better performance at the end of the day when you have so many threads that you have to eventually run. But the key piece and takeaway from this is that you should have a good understanding of how long your memory delay, a memory stall is going to take, your cache miss would take, so that you allocate in your hardware enough warps, enough thread context in there to fill that space. Because what you don't want is everyone to have a cache miss of all the threads in your system, and you still have, and then you now idle, waiting for any of their cache misses to be serviced. You wanna have always enough compute to run, so which is why it's always encouraged to have more and more threads to support in your GPU, even if you can't have the hardware to support it, yes. Right, so switching between the warps may affect our cache utilization in some way. That is generally going to be true if you assume, if you're not assuming that your programs are very compute-intensive. So if you have a high computational intensity or operational intensity, is that term, which is usually just a ratio of how much work you do per byte of data that you request, if that is high, then your cache doesn't need to grow too high accordingly, because most of the work your threads are doing is purely compute. If that is not high, and this is a completely very memory-intensive application, then you will find yourself being bottlenecked by memory over the compute, which is a difficult situation to deal with because a GPU is not built to make memory accesses faster. It gives you high throughput, but there's only so much we could do to speed up what your memory can do. The memory wall still exists. Your DRAMs and your memory will still be slower to access than your processing pipeline. So yes. Yes, yes. Right, so locality will be an important thing. We'll get to it when we talk about the memory hierarchy for GPUs. But you're right. When your locality is a little bit weaker, then you're not able to capitalize, and a single miss can dramatically affect all of the threads in the same warp that are trying to move. It only takes one of them to miss to have an issue. That said, it's actually interesting the way that works, because you could always trade it off again if somehow you could support more thread contexts. And if you're smart, even if your locality is weak, as long as if one thread misses, all other threads in that same warp are expected to miss too, you're not actually losing out on much. The penalty and impact of that one thread out of eight or 16 or 32 missing is much more diminished if all of us are missing anyway. So it's kind of like if you're gonna fail this class, it's fine if everyone fails the class, because then you're on par with the average. Please do not quote me on that. I know this is on recording now. But right, so when that happens then, then the utilization and the waste you're getting is not really there, because then you throw in another warp to run in, and nothing feels wasted. It was an inevitable miss at the end of the day. So as long as you have other compute to throw in, your cache behavior, you don't have to see hits that often at the end of the day. You can just throw in enough other compute to be done to hide the latency of that miss, which is crazy when you think about it. The fundamental thing that will hold you back will be missing because of your instruction caches, but the nice thing about your GPU programs is we're all running the same thing, so you're not very high in your instruction memory usage to begin with. But that is the one thing that will, technically speaking, hold you back. Okay, I think this is probably a good point to stop right now. There's a lot of stuff for interconnects and GPUs today, and you guys need a little bit of time. Reminder for Friday is still your progress report. Hopefully it's just really trying to instigate and make sure you guys are moving and moving in a direction, and identify the issues that you might have, if not already had, and then specify it and show us that you've thought about a plan to change. So no class on Friday. I will see you all again on Monday.
