Title: ECE757 - GPUs (Part 2)
Source file: ECE757 - GPUs (Part 2).mp4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Hope everyone's enjoying this fine winter's day out there. Shall I compare these to a summer's day that are more snowy and less temperate? So we're going to continue off our discussion of GPUs. So last time we closed out interconnects, that was the last piece of flow control and the router microarchitecture. And then we got into the high-level concept of the GPUs. Today we'll go and dig a little bit more into the architecture. There's a lot of nuances to the architecture. I'll try to focus on the high-level things that you could walk away from. A lot of it is also not very well documented. So I'll keep things broad so that the concepts still apply, regardless of any new innovations, because this industry moves very quickly. So we'll be looking at the architecture, the memory organization, and the coherence in detail, and then a little bit of the programming side. So I know there's another course that's focused on this, like 759, and many of you will take that. So more of the details there. I would highly recommend taking a course like that if you want the GPU programming experience. OK. So first, to understand how the architecture is built, you need to know how the threads are organized and what that means. So effectively, just like in CUDA in particular, that's what I'm going to use for the most part as our baseline. So I'm describing using the NVIDIA terminology. But a lot of the concepts extend. There's a lot of terms that are synonymous. I'll try to use both terms at the same time whenever I can. But effectively, the idea is that, as we said, the GPU is this accelerator that's coupled with a host machine, a general purpose machine that's capable of supporting a runtime in an OS. So that would typically be your CPU. And the idea is you need that CPU to initialize and post-process anything and everything the GPU does. So effectively, the way your GPU application will look like is you'll have code running on the CPU with regular, quote, unquote, serial execution. It could be a multiprocessor. It could be multi-threaded, whatever it may be. It's running on the CPU. The host will prepare things. And then it will invoke a kernel call. So we'll see the semantics a bit when we get to the programming side. But effectively, you are just providing some specifications on how many threads there will be, the organization of the threads, et cetera. And then they will then be sent over and run on the GPU. So the kernel call will be a dedicated function that has its own syntax that will be compiled into a separate binary that uses the ISA supported by the GPU. And when that's done, when a kernel is finished, there is an implicit synchronization that waits for all the threads to finish before it comes back and tells the CPU that you're ready to go. The CPU will post-process this and do whatever it takes and could potentially be running other kernels afterwards and potentially even at the same time, issuing multiple kernels onto the GPU. So each kernel is executed as a grid of thread blocks. So a grid is the overall space of all the threads that comprise your GPU program. And then the thread blocks are a dedicated separate region. So all the threads are assumed to share the same memory space that's available. So that's the global memory that will be available to all threads. A thread block, though, is a specific batch of the threads that are actually capable of some level of cooperation with each other. So you would synchronize. They're able to synchronize their execution using barriers and other sort of primitive methods. They have a shared memory because they are expected to run on the same sort of device and the exact same processor. We'll get into the architecture of that in a moment. So then they have access to a dedicated local shared memory. And then outside of a thread block, the cooperation is expected to be zero or minimal. Generally speaking, you would write your program assuming you have no cooperation outside the thread block. And if you needed that level of cooperation globally, you would be writing separate kernels so that you could leverage the implicit synchronization that happens when a kernel terminates and a kernel starts. So what are these thread blocks? So all the threads in the thread block execute on the same machine. So when you do scheduling and you have dedicated GPU machines, at least any of the threads that are within the same thread block, you can guarantee those will end up on the same one. And then you usually declare your block size. There's different sort of block sizes supported for different architectures and different systems. You can expect sort of up to hundreds of concurrent threads within your thread block. And then you would also define a dimensionality to it if it simplifies as your algorithm. So that simply provides simple indexing and mechanisms for storing your data in one-dimensional, two-dimensional, three-dimensional formats. As we talked about before, legacy reasons for this is because GPUs were graphics processing units and still are. And a lot of the graphics that we deal with tend to operate in this kind of organization. And then each thread has an ID, a unique ID, within its block. And it also has a unique ID globally. But usually, you would use this thread ID within the block in order to select which work you are going to take care of. So because each of us is unique, then we simply have to reason about the data using some common base address. As an example, we would then access the data that's our ID offset to that common base address. That's how we're all able to do concurrent work on all the data available. So a typical GPU architecture will look something like this. So these terms are specific to the NVIDIA architecture. At the end of the day, the concepts are going to be generalizable. So your overall GPU consists of a streaming processor array. And then each of these is composed into what's often referred to as a texture processing cluster. At the end of the day, whatever that terminology and organization is, is just a tile composed of streaming multiprocessors, or SMs. Now, your SMs are the key piece. And that's the key piece that's generalizable across architectures. And effectively, what it is is, as we saw before, it's that merged execution hardware threads of many lanes. And the idea is that we merged our fetch and decode, and we're able to store register files and contexts for many threads at the same time. So what that allows us to do is we could allocate a whole bunch of thread blocks onto this one SM, even if this SM can only run 32 threads at any moment in time. That's OK. We will be able to have space for all of their register files so we know what current state they're in, what their current PC, their program counter, is at the moment to know where they left off and be able to schedule them in at any moment in time. That's what each of these SMs does. And a thread block guarantees that all of your threads will end up on the same SM. And then within this, you have these streaming processors that's simply your scalar lanes. So that's where a single thread will operate. And it will provide some number of these in order to support the size of each warp. So we briefly discussed that term before. That's how many threads can run at any moment in time in parallel. There will also be special functional units that could do sine, cosine, reciprocal, square roots, these kinds of things. And then there will also be texture units, which we don't get into in too much detail. But effectively, these are able to do texture-based processing that's common for graphics. That simply means is you usually want to map out a texture, a predefined 2D image onto a surface of a 3D model. And a lot of that will involve some sophisticated hardware, which is actually provided, such as texture caches that are capable of doing automatic floating point conversion for you, as well as linear interpolation of values that lets you do it. There's actually some cool things there. I'll get to that in a moment when we get to some of that architecture. OK, so the main piece of the GPU is this super processor, if you will. That's just a whole bunch of hardware threads that amortize the cost of the fetches and decodes within it. So that's your SM, your streaming multiprocessor. So the way it works is you're able to dispatch the instructions through all of the lanes with the assumption that all of the threads within a chunk are running the exact same instruction at any moment in time. And we saw what happens when we have deviations in control flow, for example. If there's an if-else statement, it just means that if we're in the if part, anyone who resolves to else will end up being idle. And if we're in the else part, anyone who resolves to if will end up being idle. So we can usually store orders of magnitude worth of thread context here with the flexible space and the memory inside that's holding all of the registers. And we'll talk about how that is dynamically partitioned. And then a warp is what we had defined, which is very commonly the standard is 32 threads per warp. And the idea here is that any threads within a warp will execute in lockstep. Now, any threads within a warp will be guaranteed to be within the same thread block. So your thread block will consist of a whole bunch of warps. You could view this as analogous to how pages and cache blocks and cache lines are allocated in memory. They're all generally aligned to powers of two sizes. And I could have a 4 kilobyte page. And in windedness, I have data organized in cache lines, or in lines, or blocks, whatever it may be. And if you are in the same cache line, you are guaranteed to be on the same page as well. So it's sort of just different granularity. So a warp is the granularity of execution. If we are in the same warp, we are always on the same instruction, because when I run this add, you are running this add with me. Within a thread block, though, we may be on different instructions, but we are still running the same GPU program. So that's why, as I talked about before, people view this less as SIMD, because you have SIMD execution within your warp. That is true. But it's SPMD, Single Program Multiple Data Execution, within all the threads in your program, in your thread block, et cetera, because you may not all be at the same instruction at the same time. So what the scheduler does is it allows for each of the streaming processors to then take some thread blocks from your grid, so your entire set of threads available in your kernel, and it will distribute them among all the available SMs in your GPU. So if we have eight SMs, it'll try to figure out the proper organization to usually uniformly distribute your thread blocks across the eight SMs. And then with some recent research from the folks from CS here, there is some interesting things that you can do to try to provide locality among thread blocks or potentially threads from different kernels that may have some actual frequent communication with each other and try to co-locate them on the same SMs. OK. So then each SM will then try to launch warps of these threads. And as we talked about before, effectively you're just time multiplexing them, whoever is ready to run, and we have fine-grained multi-threading available within each of the SMs. And then after everything is complete, then all the resources are effectively free, and then we could redistribute the next kernel if available. OK. So as I talked about, the granularity for assignment to SMs are thread blocks. And the granularity for execution in lockstep are the thread warps themselves. And then the idea is that the SM is able to maintain the thread ID and will be able to dedicate a specific set of the available GPU resources to track this thread ID's register files and the program counter values. So it knows exactly where it is at any moment in time. And then the warp, kind of analogous to the cache line, again, is a hardware decision. So it's not something that the software programmer is deciding on. And a lot of times for the challenge for portability is it's not something that may not be standard size as well. And you may not know. Your compiler would know because it has an idea of what back end you plan to run on. But you as the programmer may not know if you're trying to build a portable program. In the same way, when you write a CPU program, you can't always guarantee that your cache block is going to be 64 bytes in size. It could be 128 bytes, but you're still going to run and compile this binary and expect it to run on any of these machines. So it should run correctly regardless, but the performance you'll get will depend and can potentially vary. So if you try to heavily optimize for a 64 byte cache line, your performance could be a very, very different thing when you get it on a different cache block size. So for the warps, it's the same thing. That's an invisible piece, though we could usually try to optimize it because it's generally well known that your warps will be around 32 threads in size. The thread blocks, though, is what you have defined. And there will be some flexibility. As a software programmer, you will be able to choose from a range of sizes for your thread blocks. So that, semantically, is just you deciding how things are going to be scheduled in the same way that I can schedule and allocate threads to run on. If I have a many threaded CPU program, but I only have two cores of CPUs available, then I can choose which ones will go on the left and which ones will go on the right. That's what you're basically and effectively doing the thread blocks as well. So the warps, then, are the scheduling units that happen within each of these SMs. So effectively, we'll have a multi-threaded warp scheduler. This is just like any other sort of out of order processor scheduler, except a pipeline tends to be in order. The only decision making it really needs to do is recognize when the current warp is hitting a potential stall, is getting some form of delay, and then issuing another warp to run in its stead if such a stall exists, because you want to minimize the underutilization or any idle cycles in your GPU. So the way it works will look something like this. That is just a very high level view of the architecture. But a lot of the concepts are very similar to what they were before. And the idea is we just need some initial logic to know which threads and which thread contexts within the GPU resources are actually active and able to run in some respect. And then we have a fetch and decode based on the common PC of the threads in a single warp. We can fetch that instruction once, decode it once, and then allocate registers for it. Usually, the pipelines, even though it's in order within the GPU, you want a relatively deep pipeline. So you still have to do some form of scoreboarding, which just means hazard resolution. So that means things like, if I send off this instruction and it's going to produce and write to register R1, and then right after it is another instruction that needs to read R1, because our pipelines will tend to be deep, the execution of that producer instruction could take a while and multiple cycles until it will actually produce R1. So yes, it's in order, but there is still a hazard, because you can't have the consuming instruction immediately after it, because R1 won't be ready for a while. So if you recall, well, not from 552, but if any of you took 752 or other advanced microarchitecture courses, you need to do some basic resolution in order to stall an instruction if there are any dependencies. And then modern GPUs will also tend to use some level of register renaming, so that it doesn't have to deal with this for anti-dependencies, so wars and right after rights as well. So what it will look like will be something like this. So at any moment in time, it could pick among any potentially executing warps at any moment, whether they be in the same thread block or completely different thread blocks. Usually, the scheduling policy will try to be fair. So if we have multiple thread blocks available, thread block one, two, and three available, we will try to run warps for each of them and distribute it whenever we can in a round-robin policy, so that it's fair and no thread block itself is particularly getting starved. At the end of the day, it's questionable how much of an impact this has if these are all part of the same kernel, because at the end of the day, you are waiting for the last thread to finish. But as long as, if you've ideally filled all the cycles with some useful work, it doesn't matter if you did thread block one entirely first, thread block two, thread block three, you're going to finish the same time as interleaving them perfectly one after another as well in a round-robin fashion. So technically speaking, if you are able to get maximum utilization of your GPU, it honestly doesn't matter how you schedule things, but that fairness does matter if these thread blocks that are being scheduled come from different kernels, which is possible on some GPUs. You could have two different kernels running at the same time, and then you may have some level of unfairness going on there. So you could have a single warp. For example, warp one here is able to run six instructions until it finally hits some form of stall, and that could be some level of memory access, whatever it may be. It could even be sort of a very deep register hazard from a deep pipeline, whatever that might be, like a floating-point operation could take a long time, and you have a raw dependence immediately after the floating-point operation, so you gotta wait. So when that happens, the scheduler has to recognize this and will then pick the next warp. In this case, it's picking fairly. We'll pick from thread block two, and we'll pick the first warp from there. And then once that hits a stall, we will then move to thread block three, et cetera. At some point, when these dependencies are resolved, like for example, memory provides data if you have a memory stall, then the system also needs to be able to update sort of who is active and who is ready to go in order to do that scheduling properly. So it has a gigantic bitmask or bit vector available that tracks which of the warps are ready to go at any moment in time. And so the key is scheduling has to have this, and the bitmask will have to scale with the warp, not the thread block, because as we talked about, even warps within the same thread block can be at different times of the program at any moment. You could try to lockstep entire large chunks of thread blocks, but then chances are that may not be super fruitful for you, and it might not make sense, because the only reason why we're running these 32 threads all of the same instruction right now is because we have 32 lanes available in our SM. Okay. So we'll see a little bit more of the architecture in the context of memory. So now, the way the GPU memory architecture is looks a little bit different than what we'll see in a typical CPU. So first of all, we have dedicated memory available for registers, these are meant to be fast, and these are still meant to be large, much bigger than a typical register file, because as I talked about before, we need to support many, many, many threads within the system. So logically, it's drawn like this, sort of among the threads in different thread blocks, but within the same SM, this register file will actually be a big pool of physical registers that you will then dynamically partition based on the number of thread blocks that you've allocated on this SM. There will also be local memory that's available. So this is typically any form of private, thread private data that needs to be accounted for. So common use cases are if you spill, you need more registers than are actually available in the ISA. Just like how we do in a CPU, we typically use the stack. That's what local memory is for. We have shared memory, which is just a common shared memory within each machine, within each SM, and then a global memory, which is global to everybody, and read-only constant memory and texture memory. So we'll get into what each of these are. The key piece is that the latter three are what the CPU has access to, and that's how any form of communication between the accelerator and its host works through that global memory. Okay, so the global memory is the key piece, and the contents for this is visible across all threads. That said, if you are two threads in two different thread blocks and you want to access this global memory, just be ready because any races will not be handled properly because you can't guarantee any synchronization among threads across different thread blocks. So chances are you are writing your program to minimize any level of that sharing anyway because GPUs were built for massively parallel processing to begin with. Constant memory is effectively some level of read-only memory that'll be more optimized because it doesn't need to maintain any level of coherence and any notion of writes and modifications. So read-only memory and constant memory is typically just things that, for example, like the texture that needs to be mapped out or other such constants that are going to be available in your application. And if you want the specific capabilities that I talked about with the texture memory, then there will be a dedicated space for that. So as I mentioned before, there's actual hardware in there within the caches themselves that lets you do floating point conversion and actual interpolation. We actually did a project on this back when I was a grad student that actually leveraged on this because it was cool. So the caches, the texture cache, in a way, could be indexed by value effectively. So what that means is, say I will map out, instead of your addresses, you could think of your address space as like floating point values and I want to get like address 4.5. And what it'll do is the hardware will naturally interpolate what's at address 4 and what's at address 5 in order to get you something. Because the way it works is when you have, when you're doing this texture mapping, you have a surface of a 3D model and you want to take like, oh, okay, this is my ball. And then I have this 2D image of what the surface of the ball is going to be and I want to map it on. Some places will stretch more than you expect and some places will compress more. When you stretch, you may not have a value to represent that within the pixel space of the texture that you're trying to map in. So it'll interpolate it. So if your texture is not high resolution, you will see this stretch in the same way that if you see that, if you watch a movie with poor graphics or if you play a game that has sort of very dynamic graphics, every now and then when there's this kind of activity, you will see this visible stretch that happens. So the hardware does that for free. So your software doesn't have to do that, which is kind of cool. So we were using it for random approximate computing like we always like to do. And we were populating the texture cache with like little predictors and things and having it do free interpolation and prediction for us. So there's a lot of cool things that can be done. That said, they do some weird innovations here that are not very well documented. So you first have to figure out what exactly they're trying to do with the texture memory units. But if you can and leverage it, that'll be really cool. Yeah, we were always trying to interest it to see if there were more general purpose uses for this and not just specific to graphics. Okay. So other things, there's the local memory as I talked about before, any variables that are statically defined per thread or anything that are just register spilling. So if I only have 16 architectural registers available, naturally I might write a program that needs more than that. I just need to hold more temporary information. So you'll have to spill like you would in a stack into that. There's a shared memory. This is what allows inter-thread communication to happen, but you can only guarantee it within a thread block because as we talked about before, a thread block is the scheduling granularity where you can guarantee that you will always be in the same SM. Now you can't, if you're in the same warp, yes, you can also guarantee you'll be in the same SM, but as we talked about before, the warp is a hardware definition. So you may not, if you're writing a portable GPU program, you may not know exactly how big each warp is going to be. You just have to have a general notion like with cache blocks that putting threads together and defining their IDs to be next to each other increases the likelihood that they'll be on the same warp. So putting your data together in your random program will increase the likelihood that they'll be on the same cache line. That's all we can operate on. And as we'll get to a little bit, it gets a little bit more complex depending on the consistency model and coherence protocol that's in place with the GPU because a lot of times now in order to support data race freedom, the data race free model, if people recall that, that guarantees consistency and operates at the word granularity, the granularity of any load or store. So it doesn't operate at the block granularity, which means it gets a little bit tricky in dealing with that because we don't actually get much cache locality anymore, but we'll see what the GPU does that takes care of these kinds of things. And finally, the global memory is shared by all threads and then any inter-grid communication. So within thread blocks is something that is often not supported explicitly in the architecture. And if you want to guarantee it on any arbitrary GPU, you would have to do any level of inter-grid communication across kernels because the kernel boundaries is the only place where you have explicit synchronization all the time. So the register file, as I mentioned before, it's not something that's individual for all of your thread contexts. At any moment in time in an SM, you may not actually know exactly how many threads that are going to be there. So that's dynamic. It depends on the thread block sizes that the programmers have chosen and how many of those get assigned to this SM. So instead of the physical registers, you'll typically just have like a couple orders of magnitude of kilobytes of physical registers available in a single SM. And these will then be dynamically partitioned across all the thread blocks that are scheduled to run on the SM. So this is a little bit of a game because you can allocate more physical registers to a thread block if it comes in. But then once you've assigned it to that thread block, it's locked in. You can't take away physical registers for it until that thread block is done executing. So then if you've assigned too many physical registers, then you can't schedule a new thread block in that needs those. And what that means is now you may have potential fragmentation of resources in your GPU because you can't put more thread blocks in just because you're aggressive. So it's a bit of a tricky game. The more physical registers you have, the more flexibility you have in dealing with renaming and anti-dependencies that will exist in your program code. Because if you run out of physical registers and then you have award dependence, so some instruction is gonna end up overriding a register that the instruction immediately before it is still reading, you're gonna have to stall now. Usually you could rename that and not have to worry, but if you're out of physical registers, you're gonna have to wait because you can't let that instruction run and overwrite what this instruction in front of it is reading because with a deep pipeline, it's not finished reading that data. So then the register bank itself is broken up into multiple banks because the whole point is that we want to be able to run an entire 32 lanes of threads within our warp at any moment in time. So when they all get to an instruction that needs to read a register, they all need to read a register. So you need to adequately provide enough banks within your register memory and then we have sort of a complex operand collector that's able to look at all of the reads and what needs to be collected from all of the pending instructions. Within the warp, it's all going to be the same register, which is nice. So all of us are running this instruction which accesses R1. It's a different R1 because we're all on different threads, but at least the ID is R1. So we just need to go to each bank and find the R1 associated with each of our threads. Usually this is nice and clean. We can allocate all the threads within a warp to be on different banks and get maximum performance. And if we have less banks, then a register read will simply take multiple cycles in order to complete. So even though things are in order, as we're starting to see, operations themselves can take multiple cycles just because it's physically hard to scale up and have a lot of ports, for example, in your register file and just have a lot of parallelism for the warps. So when you'll see GPUs, they will scale up in the number of threads that they can support, but you could expect the warp size to not really scale up. And that's probably just gonna be the way it is from now on. We're gonna be stuck with sort of a couple of dozen of threads running in lockstep in any machine, but we're gonna have many of these machines available to us. So the fundamental difference between the GPU memory hierarchy compared to a typical chip multiprocessor CPU memory hierarchy is that the programmer dictates effectively where data will go within all of these elements. So I am going to choose, as the programmer, I choose whether I want things to go into a shared memory because I expect threads in the same thread block to access them. I will choose whether they should all go into global memory. There are caches that are not explicitly mentioned. They follow similar processes as with the CPU, and those are invisible to the programmer. But these kinds of things, there's more options and flexibility, yes, to the programmer, but it's an easy way for programmers to get confused on what they're supposed to do and what they can do. So a lot of times, new programmers and GPUs won't necessarily know that there's available shared memory and may not view it and may not deem it in any special way. And if you have no sharing in your program, then you're gonna be like, how do I use this? I know it's faster than my global memory. How do I decide to allocate some of it that I would expect to run faster? So then you have this extra thinking just because you don't want to waste this a little bit faster shared memory available to you. The easy way is to just write your program and everything gets mapped to your global memory as it should, but then now all of a sudden somebody says, hey, if you put things here, it's a little bit faster. Now figure out what you're gonna put there. And so it's a bit of a double-edged sword, if you will, that comes with programming for the memory hierarchy in a GPU. Now what's interesting about running threads in warps is now how you end up doing loads and stores. Because when you do loads and stores, if one of us in the warp does a load, we're all doing a load, right? So you can imagine in the worst case scenario, we could potentially be doing 32 cache requests and cache lookups and try to do that in a single cycle. And that's crazy. Yes, we can bank up our register file to give us more ports, but having us ability to do 32 lookups in the cache is going to be a little bit unreasonable. And then 32 requests into memory in the worst case. So what we do is we hope that you write your program such that there is locality and then the memory unit and the cache unit will provide automatic coalescing of your requests. So that is if you are accessing the same memory block, the same cache block, we will convert that into one request or one lookup. So best case scenario, all 32 threads in the warp are accessing the exact same cache line or cache block. Then all of that becomes and coalesce into one access. Anything less regular will have to break up into multiple requests. Yes, okay, right. You're right, that is a very racy topic. We'll get to that in a moment when we get to the GPU coherence piece of it too. Because how those are handled is different and it depends on what level of consistency you want to provide for your memory system. That's a good question though. So effectively, you now have to recognize that the threads that you're going to allocate, you actually want them in a way to access the same thread line because you want this coalescing to happen. Otherwise, any breaking apart of this will cause them to all be serialized and that one load instruction that you hit will then end up taking many, many, many cycles in the sense that you do multiple lookups serialized but also that you increase the likelihood of one of these lookups missing in your cache now. So let's revisit a little bit of how we would parallelize our programs. So before, when we had a CPU, remember our general assumption was that if you have data allocated in memory, it's in row major order. So data within the same cache line like this, data across a row like that will likely be in the same cache line. Would we have preferred to parallelize on the CPU before in terms of rows or columns? As in, do you want each thread to process a row or do you want each thread to process its own column? What was the ideal way that we wanted on a CPU? Let me quickly do the poll just to see how people are. Remember, row major order. On the CPU, you have the option now, I'm gonna give you eight threads. Would you prefer to allocate such that each of the threads processes along a row, along a column? Okay, so I just wanna make sure here that we're clear on what that is. So a row basically means this thread is going to take this whole thing on a CPU. So the way you would draw it out would look something like this. And on a CPU, this is the case that you do want because what that means is you provide locality. For this thread, if it ends up on a different core, it will bring in this cache block and it will now appreciate the spatial locality available because when it moves on to the next iteration, it will access data that it already brought in. So it effectively prefetched for itself by going along the row. On a GPU, how do you wanna access the threads knowing that there's memory coalescing? This is, hopefully it's clear that we're looking for a different answer from the CPU, but you are gonna wanna go this way now because if you went the way this way here, these threads could be all in the same warp. What you're gonna do when they hit this load instruction, we're gonna access eight different cache lines and wanna do eight lookups and potentially have to handle eight cache misses at the same time. So here we actually want to, in a way, induce false sharing so that the threads that are likely to be in the same warp are going to coalesce nicely and minimize the number of actual lookups and requests that we have to the memory system. That said, if we're not likely to be in the same warp, absolutely do not have false sharing. You do not want any of that because then you're gonna have to deal with coherence or lack of that's available in your program. So that's where things get a little bit tricky. So yes, it is good and nice to know the size of a warp, but for portability, you can't always write your GPU program knowing what that is going to be. So just like with cache locality, you write your program by putting things close together in a certain pattern just like this and then you just pray and you hope that it's likely to be exploited and will run nicely on the arbitrary GPU you run on. Okay? So then that leads us now to a little bit of the coherence discussion. This is the simplified version of this because this is a bit of a complex topic that even some of the coherence folks have trouble understanding what each other was proposing. So we get weird solutions coming up, but here's my understanding of how things work, okay? So the key takeaway is that GPU applications are expected to have very minimal sharing. The whole point is you're trying to maximize processing cycles on this machine and just have lots of threads. So because of that, the typical CPU coherence protocols we've been using and talking about are going to have more overhead and complexity than you really need. They're going to have invalidation traffic that might happen for things that are not actually racy. You're going to have share tracking, which you could imagine if I'm telling you that you're putting in hundreds of thousands of threads, right, some read-only data or data that you didn't know was read-only but ends up being read-only now needs hundreds of thousands of share tracking for no absolute reason because you're never going to invalidate a single one of them. And then transient states. Transient states always add complexity to the FSM logic and incurs additional delay and potential exponential complexity when it comes to having to handle directory lookups. So the baseline GPU caches, when they were first proposed, tended to follow this pattern where they were right through with a capability to do that coalescing I just discussed. So right through, if you recall, simply means when I have a store operation to a four byte word, for example, it'll go straight through past my private cache and into the next level so that it's immediately there to minimize any of this complexity. That's what allowed us to use the very first coherence protocol I taught in this class, which is the valid-invalid protocol. So simply, a block is valid if it's present in your cache. You have read and write access to it. And then if it's not present as a cache, it's invalid. You cannot read it, but you can still write. So the point is you can always write because you are right through. And at any point that you write, all your only duty is to invalidate any other cache, private cache, that has a copy of the block. So you can write at any time you want, whether it's in your cache or not. And then when it is in your cache, it's only the only time when you could read it. And initial GPUs support basic release consistency. If you recall what that was, it means we don't guarantee any ordering of your memory accesses in your programs except for the fact that when you have a lock acquire, everything after it needs to come after the acquire. And when you have a lock release, everything before it needs to become before the release. That way we maintain a level of causality when you acquire a lock and then release it to me who then acquires the lock after you. There is a causality because now everything you have done prior to that critical section is now viewed as the past to everything I will do after my critical section. So that if we have explicit signaling and I wait on your signal and then you signal me, everything you did before signaling me is now viewed and for sure have happened. That way we have proper communication. So that's where release consistency provides. Everything else outside of that, if you're not synchronizing, is going to be undefined behavior. And so the first coherence protocol and one of the first interesting ones to try to break this paradigm was temporal coherence. And the idea was that invalidation traffic and all that logic was unnecessary for GPUs. So why don't we introduce this concept of self-invalidation? Basically any block that you bring into your private cache give itself an expiry date. So we leverage sort of a global clock that's available across all of the SMs in your GPU. And when I grab a block, I will do, they talk about a very, very basic prediction but it doesn't have to be too accurate. It still works correctly with anything. It's more of just a performance concern. But you will basically say, hey, after 45 cycles, after I bring this block in, it is going to automatically evict itself from my cache. So temporary release, if you will. So what that means then is you just have a directory that tracks what is the maximum expiry for any block. It doesn't need to track who the shares are. It just needs to know among all of the shares, what is the latest that this is going to be in anyone's cache? Such that when you write, if you are a writer, then you will look at this and you will know when it's safe to write. If you want it to maintain sequential consistency, then you will not write until all of them have expired. So you will send the write to the directory. The directory will respond to you and say, hold your write for a second. There is still some share. I don't know who that wants this until April 28th. So on April 28th, you may go ahead and write. That's if you want a sequential consistency. If you're okay with release consistency, the weaker model, you don't need to and you're willing to violate store atomicity, then that writer can do the writes as much as they want. It's only until they encounter a fence or a synchronization operation or an atomic that they're now going to have to follow that rule. So let's look at this very quick example here. We have two threads, T1 and T2. So effectively, when T2 comes in, so in the beginning of time, the directory right now stores the maximum expiry date for any of the memory locations that's shared. So there could be more threads than this, but let's say that T1 currently has flag X and Y in its private cache. And these are the expiry dates given. Flag is at 45, X is at 30, and Y is at 50. So T2 will come in and will do a write. This is a write through operation. So it'll just go ahead and write directly to memory. And then when it goes to the memory, the directory will also respond. And what the directory would say is, hey, you wrote to X. Note that there is still a share that wants this to expire at 30. You can go ahead and write to X, though. We're reduced consistency. But just note that somebody else still hasn't entered cache until time 30. So T2's gonna be like, okay, that's fine. I'm gonna proceed. I'm not gonna block on that. I'm gonna now write to Y. Write that straight into memory, write through cache. And again, the directory will respond and say, hey, that's needed until 15. Somebody still has the old value in their cache at time 15. So someone is still reading the old value. T2 doesn't care until it hits a synchronization operation like a fence. The point of a fence is to say, hey, these writes are supposed to be done and visible and performed in the perspective of everyone else in the world before moving on to this flag. So then what that means is I will have stored the 30 for X and the 15 for Y that the directory gave me and I will wait until time 30 because I hit the fence. The writes didn't have to block, but because I wanted to synchronize and I have a fence, I will now have to wait here. And then at time 30, X and Y would have self-invalidated in the other people's caches so that now by the time T2 can move on after the fence, it does this write to flag. If T1 were to see flag to be one, it is guaranteed that T1 will see the coherent and new values of X and Y because it self-invalidated and T2 waited for it to self-invalidate. So things that are allowed to move on and you're allowed to do writes, expecting that sharing is minimal, but if you decide to write your program that you introduced a fence and want to synchronize, only then do you need to wait until it expires from people's caches. And once it has, you can guarantee that everyone will miss in their cache and have to go to memory and will see what you wrote and are guaranteed to see what you wrote. Question, yes. Yeah. That's a subtle question because it's unclear what a break point will actually do, but technically speaking, you will not move on to the next instruction until you have gotten the acknowledgement from the directory. The write will happen. It will go into the memory. There is now no longer store atomicity. This is a good exam question to explain me why. There is no store atomicity because I'm writing directly to memory. If some random other thread decides to read it, they will see this value before anyone else. So I will put it into memory right away. That said, I will not move on to the next instruction until I've received the acknowledgement. So then I will have the expiry date prior to entering the fence, prior to going to the fence. And that's where then at least the values are guaranteed to all be in memory now. But when I do the fence, I now have all the expiry date information to know how long I should wait. Yeah. It will overwrite the value in memory. And if you have a fence in there in place, then it will also wait there separately. If you don't want this to happen, effectively what you've described is a write race, right? Two threads are writing at the same time. If you don't want this to happen, you should have adequately synchronized. So the other thread that was going to write should have been waiting for some signal from you, which would have been wrapped in fences too. So it's basically data race free. This is part of the... So yeah, each thread in the SM for this design needs to introduce a way to track the expiry that was received from the directory. Yes. Yeah. Right, yeah. So for correctness purposes, it could be whatever you want. Finite, though. Yeah. So in the paper, if you're interested in it, I think it's a good paper to read. There it's actually completely software agnostic. The programmer does nothing. It's the hardware that learns it, and it learns it per thread. It decides that it's not necessary to go into the detail of which instruction is doing it. I just want to learn the general behavior of each thread or of each warp. And it's a simple matter of you set an initial time for this block. You observe then, is this block evicted before this time? Yes, decrement the time. If the block is... If I evict something and then I have a cache miss later, then increase it. So it's a very, very basic mechanism that just moves ups and down. Yeah. It's purely heuristic. There's nothing more than just to take an initial guess because it's always correct. So you can view the trade-offs of it being too short or too much, right? If you set it to zero, you're effectively saying this is no allocate. Don't put it in your cache, but you can still... Here's the data. And so that's the one extreme case. Okay, these are all good questions. I'm going to pause here.
